04.07.2023 09.16 Maintenance of sinus rhythm in atrial fibrillation: Catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic drug therapy - UpToDate  Side 1 af 9 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/maintenance-of-sinus-rhythm-in-…h _ result&selectedTitle=31~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=30  Official reprint from UpToDate  www.uptodate.com   © 2023 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.  Maintenance of sinus rhythm in atrial fibrillation:  Catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic drug therapy  INTRODUCTION  For patients with atrial fibrillation (AF), the two principal goals of long-term therapy are to  improve quality of life (eg, symptom control) and to prevent associated morbidity and  mortality (principally the prevention of thromboembolism). (See   "Hemodynamic  consequences of atrial fibrillation and cardioversion to sinus rhythm", section on 'Adverse  hemodynamics in AF'   and   "Atrial fibrillation in adults: Use of oral anticoagulants" .)  In asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic patients with AF, there is often no need to  pursue aggressive measures to maintain sinus rhythm. For those patients who might feel  better in sinus rhythm, rate- and rhythm-control strategies improve symptoms, but neither  has been conclusively shown to improve survival compared to the other. The factors  determining the choice between these two strategies are discussed elsewhere. (See  "Management of atrial fibrillation: Rhythm control versus rate control" .)  For those patients in whom a rhythm control strategy is chosen, catheter ablation or  antiarrhythmic drugs are the two principle therapeutic options. (See   "Atrial fibrillation:  Catheter ablation"   and   "Antiarrhythmic drugs to maintain sinus rhythm in patients with  atrial fibrillation: Recommendations" .)  This topic will compare the efficacy and safety of these two options for rhythm control and  ®  author :   Rod Passman, MD, MSCE  section   editors :   Bradley P Knight, MD, FACC ,   N A Mark Estes, III, MD  deputy   editor :   Nisha Parikh, MD, MPH  All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our   peer review process   is complete.  Literature review current through:   Jun 2023.  This topic last updated:   Jan 25, 2023. 04.07.2023 09.16 Maintenance of sinus rhythm in atrial fibrillation: Catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic drug therapy - UpToDate  Side 2 af 9 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/maintenance-of-sinus-rhythm-in-…h _ result&selectedTitle=31~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=30  provide recommendations for choosing one or the other.  CLASSIFICATION  The following terms are used in the classification of patients with atrial fibrillation (AF). In  the studies discussed in this topic, some, but not all, of these groups have been included  (see   "Atrial fibrillation: Overview and management of new-onset atrial fibrillation", section  on 'Classification and terminology' ):  CATHETER ABLATION AND ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUG THERAPY  General considerations   —   Catheter ablation uses either cryoablation (cryotherapy) or  radiofrequency ablation (RFA). AF will recur in one year in approximately 20 to 40 percent  of patients who have a catheter ablation, although overall AF burden is often markedly  decreased [ 3 ]; a recurrence is defined as an AF episode >30 seconds in duration on routine  monitoring. Important complications from catheter ablation include cardiac tamponade,  pulmonary vein stenosis (<1 percent), phrenic nerve paralysis (about 3 percent with  cryoballoon), and rare instances of stroke and atrioesophageal fistula [ 4,5 ]. These and  other complications are described in detail separately. (See   "Atrial fibrillation: Catheter  Paroxysmal (ie, self-terminating or intermittent)   AF   – Paroxysmal AF is defined as  recurrent AF ( ≥ 2 episodes) that terminates spontaneously in seven days or less,  usually less than 24 hours. (See   "Paroxysmal atrial fibrillation" .)  ●  Persistent AF   – Persistent AF is defined as AF that fails to self-terminate within seven  days. Episodes often require pharmacologic or electrical cardioversion to restore  sinus rhythm. While a patient who has had persistent AF can have later episodes of  paroxysmal AF, AF is generally considered a progressive disease. In individuals with  paroxysmal AF, progression to persistent and permanent AF occurs in >50 percent  beyond 10 years despite antiarrhythmic therapy [ 1 ].  ●  Long-standing persistent AF   – Long-standing persistent AF refers to persistent AF  that has lasted for one year or more [ 2 ].  ●  Permanent AF   – Permanent AF is a term used to identify individuals with persistent  AF where a decision has been made to no longer pursue a rhythm control strategy.  ● 04.07.2023 09.16 Maintenance of sinus rhythm in atrial fibrillation: Catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic drug therapy - UpToDate  Side 3 af 9 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/maintenance-of-sinus-rhythm-in-…h _ result&selectedTitle=31~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=30  ablation", section on 'Complications' .)  A 2017 randomized comparison between cryoablation and RFA showed similar success  rates, as did a meta-analysis of observational studies [ 6,7 ]. (See   "Atrial fibrillation: Catheter  ablation"   and   "Catheter ablation for the treatment of atrial fibrillation: Technical  considerations for non-electrophysiologists" .)  Commonly employed drugs to maintain sinus rhythm are   amiodarone ,   sotalol ,   dofetilide ,  dronedarone ,   flecainide , and   propafenone . Approximately 25 to 50 percent of people who  receive antiarrhythmic medications will have recurrent AF within one year. Important side  effects of antiarrhythmics include proarrhythmia, bradyarrhythmia, and organ toxicity in  the case of amiodarone. (See   "Antiarrhythmic drugs to maintain sinus rhythm in patients  with atrial fibrillation: Recommendations"   and   "Antiarrhythmic drugs to maintain sinus  rhythm in patients with atrial fibrillation: Clinical trials" .)  Approach   —   For patients with symptomatic paroxysmal AF, in whom rhythm rather than a  rate control is pursued, we suggest catheter ablation as first-line therapy in some patients  as an alternative to antiarrhythmic drugs (AADs); this is particularly true for younger  patients or patients who are poor candidates for AAD therapy or are concerned about the  potential complications of AADs. Other factors that may impact the safety and efficacy of  catheter ablation also need to be considered when deciding between catheter ablation and  AAD.  For patients with symptomatic paroxysmal or persistent AF who have failed or become  intolerant to one or more AADs, we recommend catheter ablation.  For patients with symptomatic persistent or longstanding persistent AF who have failed or  become intolerant of one or more AADs or who choose not to start antiarrhythmic therapy,  we suggest catheter ablation.  Initial treatment of paroxysmal AF with catheter cryoballoon ablation was associated with a  lower incidence of persistent AF or recurrent atrial tachyarrhythmia over three years of  follow-up than initial use of AADs. Three hundred and three patients were assigned to  undergo initial rhythm-control therapy with catheter ablation or to receive antiarrhythmic  therapy. Over 36 months of follow-up the following findings were noted:  Patients assigned catheter ablation had less persistent AF compared with patients  assigned to AADs (1.9 versus 7.4 percent; hazard ratio [HR] 0.25 95% CI 0.09-0.70).  ● 04.07.2023 09.16 Maintenance of sinus rhythm in atrial fibrillation: Catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic drug therapy - UpToDate  Side 4 af 9 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/maintenance-of-sinus-rhythm-in-…h _ result&selectedTitle=31~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=30  PATIENTS WITHOUT PRIOR ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUG TREATMENT  Some patients with paroxysmal or persistent atrial fibrillation (AF) (see   'Classification'  above) prefer a rhythm as opposed to a rate control strategy in order to decrease  symptoms (see   "Management of atrial fibrillation: Rhythm control versus rate control",  section on 'Summary and recommendations' ).  For patients who have chosen rhythm control and who have not previously received  antiarrhythmic drug (AAD) therapy, we usually start with AAD rather than CA. On occasion,  initial treatment with CA may be appropriate. All patients need to be informed of the  possibility of recurrence of symptoms and adverse events with both therapies. Recurrence  rates and side effects are discussed in detail elsewhere. (See   "Antiarrhythmic drugs to  maintain sinus rhythm in patients with atrial fibrillation: Clinical trials"   and   "Atrial  fibrillation: Catheter ablation", section on 'Complications'   and   "Antiarrhythmic drugs to  maintain sinus rhythm in patients with atrial fibrillation: Recommendations", section on  'Drug-related arrhythmias and mortality' .)  Prior to 2020, catheter ablation (CA) was generally not offered as first-line therapy given  the complexity of the procedure and the potential for complications. It was typically offered  to patients who had failed AAD therapy. However, evidence suggests that CA is superior to  AAD for control of symptoms. While CA appears superior to AAD for the prevention of AF  recurrence, there is no evidence that the rates of cardiovascular death, myocardial  infarction, or stroke differ between the two interventions. In addition, in the studies  demonstrating superiority of CA, the procedure was performed by highly expert  electrophysiologists. Thus, for most patients, we start with AAD. CA by an experienced  operator may be considered as first-line therapy for symptomatic patients who, after a full  discussion of the benefits and risks of both approaches, prefer an invasive approach.  In a meta-analysis of six studies in 1200 patients comparing CA with AAD as first-line  Patients assigned catheter ablation had less recurrent atrial tachyarrhythmia, which  occurred in 87 patients in the ablation group (56.5 percent) and in 115 in the AAD  group (77.2 percent; 56.5 versus 77.2 percent; HR 0.51 95% CI 0.38-0.67).  ●  Serious adverse events occurred in seven patients (4.5 percent) in the ablation group  and in 15 (10.1 percent) in the AAD group.  ● 04.07.2023 09.16 Maintenance of sinus rhythm in atrial fibrillation: Catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic drug therapy - UpToDate  Side 5 af 9 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/maintenance-of-sinus-rhythm-in-…h _ result&selectedTitle=31~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=30  treatment for paroxysmal AF, CA was associated with [ 8 ]:  Limitations of this study include a moderate degree of heterogeneity among the included  studies; one study in particular accounted for most of the heterogeneity (the RAAFT 2 trial)  [ 9 ].  PATIENTS WITH PRIOR ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUG TREATMENT  For patients with either paroxysmal or persistent (see   'Classification'   above) AF who are  interested in decreasing their symptom burden and have received treatment with at least  one antiarrhythmic drug, either catheter ablation or long-term antiarrhythmic drug  therapy is a reasonable approach. The patient's choice will be guided by advantages and  burdens of each approach. (See   "Atrial fibrillation: Catheter ablation"   and   "Antiarrhythmic  drugs to maintain sinus rhythm in patients with atrial fibrillation: Recommendations" .)  This section will review the studies that have directly compared the two approaches. These  studies suggest that although catheter ablation and antiarrhythmic drug therapy lead to  similar rates of all-cause mortality and other serious morbidities, there may be a greater  improvement in quality of life with the former.  This topic is not intended to address management in patients who have failed rhythm  control with two or more antiarrhythmic drugs or those who have already received  catheter ablation. Failure of an antiarrhythmic drug is defined as a drug trial that results in  a reduction in AF burden that is not satisfactory to the patient, or results in side effects that  are intolerable to the patient, proarrhythmia, or organ toxicity. (See   "Atrial fibrillation:  Lower rates of recurrent atrial arrhythmias (35 versus 53 percent; risk ratio [RR] 0.64,  95% CI 0.51-0.80) [ 8 ].  ●  Similar risks of serious adverse events (18 versus 21 percent; RR 0.87, 95% CI 0.58-  1.30). Adverse events were defined differently across studies and included stroke,  tamponade, and death.  ●  Lower rates of symptomatic atrial arrhythmias. ●  Lower healthcare resource utilization. ●  Lower rates of crossover to alternative treatment (RR 0.21, 95% CI 0.13-0.32). ● 04.07.2023 09.16 Maintenance of sinus rhythm in atrial fibrillation: Catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic drug therapy - UpToDate  Side 6 af 9 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/maintenance-of-sinus-rhythm-in-…h _ result&selectedTitle=31~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=30  Catheter ablation"   and   "Antiarrhythmic drugs to maintain sinus rhythm in patients with  atrial fibrillation: Recommendations", section on 'Long-term issues' .)  Three early meta-analyses of studies comparing catheter ablation and antiarrhythmic drug  therapy found that recurrence of AF occurred less often in patients who received catheter  ablation in the 12 months after initiation of therapy [ 10-12 ]. The following three  randomized trials directly compared catheter ablation with antiarrhythmic drug therapy:  The ThermoCool AF study randomly assigned 167 symptomatic patients with  paroxysmal AF (no episodes lasting more than 30 days) who did not respond to at  least one AAD and who experienced at least three episodes of paroxysmal AF within  six months before randomization to either catheter ablation (with RFA) or AAD  therapy in a 2:1 fashion [ 13 ]. Patients with significant left ventricular dysfunction,  persistent AF, and advanced heart failure were excluded. Catheter ablation included  pulmonary vein isolation with confirmation of entrance block, and AAD therapy  included   flecainide   (36 percent),   propafenone   (41 percent),   dofetilide ,   sotalol , or  quinidine   at the investigator's discretion. After nine months, there were significantly  fewer patients with documented symptomatic paroxysmal AF in the catheter ablation  group (16 versus 66 percent; hazard ratio 0.30, 95% CI 0.19-0.47). In addition, major  treatment-related adverse events occurred more often with AAD therapy (9 versus 5  percent) at 30 days. Mean quality-of-life scores improved significantly with catheter  ablation compared to AAD therapy.  ●  The STOP AF trial randomly assigned 245 paroxysmal AF patients (in a 2:1 manner) to  cryoballoon ablation or drug therapy [ 14 ]. Patients had previously failed drug therapy;  paroxysmal and early persistent AF were present in 78 and 22 percent, respectively.  Treatment success was defined as freedom from chronic treatment failure, as defined  by the absence of: any detectable AF after the blanking period; use of a non-study  antiarrhythmic drug; and any non-protocol intervention for AF. At 12 months, the  primary end point was present in 69.9 and 7.3 percent of the two groups (p<0.001).  Serious adverse procedure-related events occurred in 3.1 percent. Phrenic nerve palsy  occurred in 11.2 percent, but resolved in the majority.  ●  The Catheter ABlation vs ANtiarrhythmic Drug Therapy in Atrial Fibrillation (CABANA)  trial randomly assigned 2204 patients with paroxysmal (43 percent) or persistent AF  (57 percent) to catheter ablation or antiarrhythmic drug therapy [ 15 ]. Patients were  excluded if they had a prior catheter ablation or had failed two or more  ● 04.07.2023 09.16 Maintenance of sinus rhythm in atrial fibrillation: Catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic drug therapy - UpToDate  Side 7 af 9 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/maintenance-of-sinus-rhythm-in-…h _ result&selectedTitle=31~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=30  Patients with heart failure   —   Mortality and morbidity are higher among patients with  atrial fibrillation and heart failure than among those with heart failure alone. Catheter  ablation for atrial fibrillation has been proposed as a means of improving outcomes among  patients with heart failure who are otherwise receiving appropriate treatment. This issue is  discussed separately. (See   "The management of atrial fibrillation in patients with heart  failure", section on 'Catheter ablation' .)  RECOMMENDATIONS OF OTHERS  Recommendations for the use of catheter ablation are available in societal guidelines. The  antiarrhythmic drugs. The following findings were noted:  Among the patients who received antiarrhythmic drug therapy, 27.5 percent  crossed over to the ablation group.  •  The primary composite end point (death, disabling stroke, serous bleeding, or  cardiac arrest) occurred in 8.0 and 9.2 percent of the two groups, respectively  (hazard ratio [HR] 0.86, 95% CI 0.65-1.15), during a median follow-up of about four  years. There was no difference in all-cause mortality (5.2 versus 6.1 percent; HR  0.85, 95% CI 0.60-1.21). The end point of death or cardiovascular hospitalization  occurred less often with catheter ablation (51.7 versus 58.1 percent; HR 0.83, 95%  CI 0.74-0.93), as did the rate for AF recurrence (49.9 versus 69.5 percent; HR 0.52,  95% CI 0.45-0.60).  •  Both patient groups achieved significant improvement in quality-of-life scores, and  the improvement in the catheter ablation group was significantly greater than in  the drug therapy group. Using one quality-of-life tool, the mean score at baseline  was approximately 63 points. At 12 months, the scores were 80.9 and 86.4 points,  respectively [ 16 ].  •  The Catheter Ablation compared with optimized Pharmacological Therapy for Atrial  Fibrillation (CAPTAF) trial randomly assigned 155 patients with symptomatic  persistent or paroxysmal AF to catheter ablation or antiarrhythmic drug therapy [ 17 ].  The primary end point, SF-36 General Health score, improved more in the ablation  group than the drug therapy group from baseline to 12 months (mean baseline score,  61.8 versus 62.7; mean change 11.9 versus 3.1, respectively; p = 0.003).  ● 04.07.2023 09.16 Maintenance of sinus rhythm in atrial fibrillation: Catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic drug therapy - UpToDate  Side 8 af 9 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/maintenance-of-sinus-rhythm-in-…h _ result&selectedTitle=31~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=30  2016 European Society of Cardiology guideline recommends catheter ablation for patients  with symptomatic, paroxysmal, persistent, and probably long-standing persistent atrial  fibrillation who have failed (or are intolerant to) treatment with at least one antiarrhythmic  drug [ 18 ].  The 2017 HRS/EHRA/ECAS/APHRS/SOLAECE expert consensus statement on catheter and  surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation makes the following recommendations regarding  catheter ablation (CA) to maintain sinus rhythm [ 19 ]  SOCIETY GUIDELINE LINKS  Links to society and government-sponsored guidelines from selected countries and  regions around the world are provided separately. (See   "Society guideline links: Atrial  fibrillation"   and   "Society guideline links: Arrhythmias in adults" .)  SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS  CA is useful for symptomatic paroxysmal AF refractory or intolerant to at least one  class I or III antiarrhythmic medication when a rhythm control strategy is desired.  ●  CA is reasonable for selected patients with symptomatic persistent AF refractory or  intolerant to at least one class I or III antiarrhythmic medication.  ●  CA may be considered for symptomatic long-standing (>12 months) persistent AF  refractory or intolerant to at least one class I or III antiarrhythmic medication, when a  rhythm control strategy is desired.  ●  CA may be considered prior to initiation of antiarrhythmic drug therapy with a class I  or III antiarrhythmic medication for symptomatic paroxysmal AF when a rhythm  control strategy is desired.  ●  For most patients with new-onset   symptomatic paroxysmal   atrial fibrillation (AF)  who have chosen a rhythm rather than a rate control strategy, we suggest  antiarrhythmic drug (AAD) therapy rather than catheter ablation (CA) as initial therapy  ( Grade 2C ). Patients who may reasonably prefer CA as initial therapy include those  who are concerned about the potential complications of AAD or the higher rate of AF  ● 04.07.2023 09.16 Maintenance of sinus rhythm in atrial fibrillation: Catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic drug therapy - UpToDate  Side 9 af 9 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/maintenance-of-sinus-rhythm-in-…h _ result&selectedTitle=31~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=30  Use of UpToDate is subject to the   Terms of Use .  Topic 93920 Version 30.0    recurrence with it. (See   'Patients without prior antiarrhythmic drug treatment'   above.)  For patients with   symptomatic paroxysmal or persistent   AF and who have failed or  become intolerant to one or more AAD, we recommend CA ( Grade 1A ). (See   'Patients  with prior antiarrhythmic drug treatment'   above.)  ●  For patients with   symptomatic persistent or longstanding persistent   AF who have  failed or become intolerant of one   or more AAD or who choose not to start  antiarrhythmic therapy, we suggest CA ( Grade 2B ). (See   'Patients with prior  antiarrhythmic drug treatment'   above.)  ● 