04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 1 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Official reprint from UpToDate  www.uptodate.com   © 2023 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.  Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis  (Beyond the Basics)  Please read the   Disclaimer   at the end of this page.  STROKE OVERVIEW  Stroke is the term doctors use when a part of the brain dies because it goes without blood  for too long. There are two main types of stroke:  In the United States, approximately 750,000 strokes happen each year, most of which are  caused by a blockage in a blood vessel. Strokes can cause long-lasting disability or even  death. However, early treatment and preventive measures can reduce the brain damage  that occurs because of stroke.  The symptoms of a stroke usually begin suddenly but sometimes develop over hours or  days, depending upon the type of stroke. In both ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke, one or  more areas of the brain can be damaged. Depending upon the area affected, a person may  lose the ability to move one side of the body, the ability to speak, or a number of other  functions.  ®  author :   Louis R Caplan, MD  section   editor :   Scott E Kasner, MD  deputy   editor :   John F Dashe, MD, PhD  All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our   peer review process   is complete.  Literature review current through:   Jun 2023.  This topic last updated:   Mar 16, 2023.  Ischemic stroke, which is caused by a blockage in a blood vessel in the brain ●  Hemorrhagic stroke, which is caused by bleeding in the brain or surrounding area ● 04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 2 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  The damage from a stroke may be temporary or permanent. A person's long-term  outcome depends upon how much of the brain is damaged, how quickly treatment begins,  and several other factors.  TYPES OF STROKE  There are two main types of stroke: ischemic and hemorrhagic.  Ischemic stroke   —   Ischemic strokes are caused by a blockage (clog) in one of the blood  vessels that supply oxygen and other important nutrients to the brain. If the artery  remains blocked for more than a few minutes, and enough blood can't get through, the  brain can become damaged. The majority of strokes are ischemic.  There are two main subtypes of ischemic stroke, thrombotic and embolic.  Thrombotic stroke   —   A thrombotic stroke results from a problem within an artery (blood  vessel) that supplies blood to the brain. This is most likely to occur in arteries that are  clogged with fatty deposits, called plaques. Plaques partially block the artery, and can  rupture and bleed, forming a blood clot. This blood clot ("thrombus") can further clog or  completely block the artery, which then slows or prevents blood flow to the area of brain  fed by that artery. Blood clotting disorders can also cause clots to form within arteries in  some people.  Embolic stroke   —   An embolic stroke occurs when a blood clot or other particle breaks  loose from another part of the body, often the heart or a large artery in the neck, and  travels through the bloodstream to the brain where it lodges in a smaller blood vessel. The  blood clot or particle, called an "embolus," then blocks blood flow to that area of the brain,  reducing the amount of oxygen and nutrients that reach that area. One of the most  common causes of embolic strokes is an irregular heart rhythm called "atrial fibrillation."  Emboli can also originate in the aorta and in the arteries within the neck and head and  travel further along within arteries within the brain. (See   "Patient education: Atrial  fibrillation (Beyond the Basics)"   and   "Patient education: Antiphospholipid syndrome  (Beyond the Basics)" .)  Transient ischemic attack (TIA)   —   Transient ischemic attacks are episodes in which a  person has signs or symptoms of a stroke (eg, weakness; inability to speak) that last for a  short time, but without any sign of stroke on brain scans such as MRI or CT. Symptoms of a 04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 3 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  TIA usually last between a few minutes and a few hours. A person may have one or many  TIAs. People recover completely from the symptoms of a TIA.  A TIA is a warning sign that a person is at high risk for a stroke; immediate treatment can  decrease or eliminate this risk. It is important to get help right away if you think you may  be having a TIA or a stroke.  Hemorrhagic stroke   —   Hemorrhagic strokes occur when blood vessels in the brain leak or  rupture (break), causing bleeding in or around the brain. "Hemorrhage" is the medical  term for bleeding. This can lead to pressure within the head, which can cause damage to  the brain. Also, blood is irritating to the brain tissue, and can cause it to swell.  There are two main subtypes of hemorrhagic stroke, intracerebral and subarachnoid.  Intracerebral hemorrhage   —   In an intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH), bleeding occurs  within the brain. This damages the brain as blood collects and puts pressure on the  surrounding tissue. Some common causes of ICH include:  Subarachnoid hemorrhage   —   Subarachnoid hemorrhage occurs when a blood vessel on  the surface of the brain ruptures. The blood builds up and causes pressure in the  "subarachnoid" space, which is between two layers of the tissue covering the brain. The  most common early symptom of a subarachnoid hemorrhage is a severe headache called  "thunderclap headache," which many patients describe as the worst headache of their life.  (See   "Patient education: Headache causes and diagnosis in adults (Beyond the Basics)" .)  STROKE RISK FACTORS  There are a number of risk factors for stroke; some of these factors increase the risk of one  type of stroke (hemorrhagic or ischemic), while others increase the risk of both types.  Ischemic stroke risk factors include the following:  High blood pressure ●  Injury ●  Bleeding disorders ●  Deformities in blood vessels, such as an aneurysm (a weakening in the lining of the  blood vessel)  ● 04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 4 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Hemorrhagic stroke risk factors include the following:  Risk factors can increase the risk of stroke, but strokes can happen in people who don't  know that they are at risk. In some cases, the stroke may be due to problems with the  blood vessels in the brain or the blood itself. For example:  Occasionally, strokes occur in people who have no risk factors.  STROKE SYMPTOMS  Signs and symptoms of stroke often develop suddenly and then may temporarily improve  or slowly worsen, depending upon the type of stroke and area of the brain affected.  Age older than 40 years ●  Heart disease ●  High blood pressure ●  Smoking ●  Diabetes ●  High blood cholesterol levels ●  Illegal drug use ●  Recent childbirth ●  Previous history of transient ischemic attack ●  Inactive lifestyle and lack of exercise ●  Obesity ●  Current or past history of blood clots ●  Family history of cardiac disease and/or stroke ●  High blood pressure ●  Smoking ●  Illegal drug use (especially cocaine and "crystal meth") ●  Use of   warfarin   or other blood thinning medicines ●  A hemorrhagic stroke can occur if a person has an aneurysm (a weakness in a blood  vessel wall), even if this has never caused symptoms in the past.  ●  An ischemic stroke may occur in a healthy person who takes certain medications (for  example, estrogen replacement therapy increases the risk of blood clots).  ● 04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 5 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Classic symptoms   —   Knowing the signs and symptoms of a stroke can be lifesaving.  Classic stroke symptoms can be recalled with the acronym   BE FAST   (   figure 1 ). Each letter  in the word stands for one of the things you should watch for:  Signs and symptoms of a stroke may be similar to other conditions; the only way to know  for sure is to be seen as soon as possible by an experienced doctor or nurse.  When to call for emergency medical assistance   —   A stroke is a medical emergency. If  you think you or someone around you may be having a stroke,   call for an ambulance (in  the US and Canada, call 9-1-1) immediately . Do not try to drive yourself to the hospital.  Emergency medical services (EMS) workers will respond as quickly as possible, and will take  you to a hospital that can care for people during and after a stroke. For a person having a  stroke, every minute is important. It is important to call 9-1-1 in this situation because:  STROKE DIAGNOSIS  Anyone who has signs or symptoms of a stroke needs immediate medical attention in an  emergency department or hospital. Most clinics and medical offices do not have the ability  to perform the tests needed to diagnose stroke, or the ability to provide the specialized  B alance – Difficulty standing or walking ●  E yes – Changes in vision ●  F ace – Sudden weakness or droopiness of the face, or problems with vision ●  A rm – Sudden weakness or numbness of one or both arms ●  S peech – Difficulty speaking, slurred speech, or garbled speech ●  T ime – Time is very important in stroke treatment. The sooner treatment begins, the  better the chances are for recovery.   If you notice any of the above signs, call for an  ambulance (in the US and Canada, call 9-1-1) right away.  ●  From the moment EMS workers arrive, they can begin evaluating and treating you. If  you drive yourself to the hospital or have someone else drive you, treatment cannot  begin until after you arrive in the emergency department.  ●  If a dangerous complication of a stroke (eg, a seizure or loss of consciousness) occurs  on the way to the hospital, EMS workers may be able to treat the problem  immediately.  ● 04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 6 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  treatment(s) needed to limit damage to the brain. (See   "Overview of the evaluation of  stroke"   and   "Initial assessment and management of acute stroke" .)  Brain and blood vessel imaging   —   After doing a quick physical exam, the doctor or nurse  usually sends the patient right away for an imaging test of the brain (eg, CT scan or MRI  scan) and an imaging test of the blood vessels in the neck and head (eg, CT angiography or  MR angiography) that supply the brain with blood. The imaging allows the doctor or nurse  to see the area of the brain affected by the stroke, as well as to confirm the type of stroke  (ischemic or hemorrhagic). Other tests may be done as well.  Occasionally, a catheter must be inserted through a blood vessel in the groin and threaded  up to the blood vessels of the neck, where dye is injected to highlight any areas of  blockage.  Heart testing   —   An electrocardiogram (ECG) is performed in most people who are thought  to be having a stroke. Because many people with ischemic strokes also have coronary  artery disease, there may be a lack of blood flow (called "ischemia") in the heart during the  stroke. In some cases, the person may not be able to tell the clinician that he or she feels  chest pain. The ECG will help the clinician to diagnose and treat any heart problems as  quickly as possible.  Other heart testing may also be recommended, such as an echocardiogram. This test uses  sound waves to examine the heart and the aorta (the main artery that supplies the whole  body). In some people with embolic strokes, the heart or the aorta is the source of the  blood clot that led to the stroke. As an example, a heart rhythm problem called atrial  fibrillation is a high-risk condition for blood clot formation and ischemic stroke. Some  people have occasional episodes of atrial fibrillation but are not aware of it, and it may not  show up on routine heart tests such as the ECG. Therefore, doctors often use continuous  cardiac monitoring to look for atrial fibrillation and other heart rhythm problems for the  first day or two when patients are in the hospital for a stroke. In some cases, patients will  need to wear a small portable cardiac monitor for a period of time after the stroke to see if  they have episodes of atrial fibrillation. (See   "Patient education: Atrial fibrillation (Beyond  the Basics)" .)  STROKE TREATMENT 04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 7 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  The treatment of a stroke depends upon the type of stroke, the time that has passed since  the first symptoms occurred, and the patient's other medical problems. Information about  treatment is provided separately. (See   "Patient education: Hemorrhagic stroke treatment  (Beyond the Basics)"   and   "Patient education: Ischemic stroke treatment (Beyond the  Basics)" .)  OUTCOME AFTER STROKE  The effects of a stroke can be temporary or permanent, and a person may lose function  partially or completely. The medical team caring for the patient can give guidance to family  members regarding the risk of long-term disability or death. However, the outcome can  vary greatly from person to person, and it is not always possible to predict what will  happen, especially in the first hours or days after a stroke.  WHERE TO GET MORE INFORMATION  Your healthcare provider is the best source of information for questions and concerns  related to your medical problem.  This article will be updated as needed on our web site (   www.uptodate.com/patients ).  Related topics for patients, as well as selected articles written for healthcare professionals,  are also available. Some of the most relevant are listed below.  Patient level information   —   UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials.  The Basics   —   The Basics patient education pieces answer the four or five key questions a  patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a  general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials.  Patient education: Hemorrhagic stroke (The Basics)  Patient education: Stroke (The Basics)  Patient education: Subarachnoid hemorrhage (The Basics)  Patient education: Transient ischemic attack (The Basics)  Patient education: Arteriovenous malformations in the brain (The Basics)  Patient education: High blood pressure emergencies (The Basics)  Patient education: Aphasia (The Basics) 04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 8 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Patient education: Recovery after stroke (The Basics)  Patient education: Prosthetic valves (The Basics)  Patient education: Aortic dissection (The Basics)  Patient education: Medicines for atrial fibrillation (The Basics)  Patient education: Patent foramen ovale (The Basics)  Beyond the Basics   —   Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more  sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are best for patients who want in-depth  information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.  Patient education: Atrial fibrillation (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Antiphospholipid syndrome (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Headache causes and diagnosis in adults (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Hemorrhagic stroke treatment (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Ischemic stroke treatment (Beyond the Basics)  Professional level information   —   Professional level articles are designed to keep doctors  and other health professionals up-to-date on the latest medical findings. These articles are  thorough, long, and complex, and they contain multiple references to the research on  which they are based. Professional level articles are best for people who are comfortable  with a lot of medical terminology and who want to read the same materials their doctors  are reading.  Long-term antithrombotic therapy for the secondary prevention of ischemic stroke  Approach to reperfusion therapy for acute ischemic stroke  Atrial fibrillation in adults: Use of oral anticoagulants  Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and  leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL)  Cerebrovascular disorders complicating pregnancy  Clinical diagnosis of stroke subtypes  Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: Clinical manifestations and diagnosis  Cryptogenic stroke and embolic stroke of undetermined source (ESUS)  Malignant cerebral hemispheric infarction with swelling and risk of herniation  Definition, etiology, and clinical manifestations of transient ischemic attack  Differential diagnosis of transient ischemic attack and acute stroke  Stroke: Etiology, classification, and epidemiology  Cerebral venous thrombosis: Etiology, clinical features, and diagnosis 04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 9 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Migraine-associated stroke: risk factors, diagnosis, and prevention  Initial assessment and management of acute stroke  Initial evaluation and management of transient ischemic attack and minor ischemic stroke  Spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: Pathogenesis, clinical features, and diagnosis  Spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: Acute treatment and prognosis  Intracranial large artery atherosclerosis: Epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and  diagnosis  Intracranial large artery atherosclerosis: Treatment and prognosis  Intravenous thrombolytic therapy for acute ischemic stroke: Therapeutic use  Lacunar infarcts  Complications of stroke: An overview  Overview of secondary prevention of ischemic stroke  Neuroimaging of acute stroke  Overview of the evaluation of stroke  Posterior circulation cerebrovascular syndromes  Overview of secondary prevention for specific causes of ischemic stroke and transient  ischemic attack  Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: Treatment and prognosis  The following organizations also provide reliable health information.  (   https://medlineplus.gov/healthtopics.html )  (   https://www.ninds.nih.gov/Disorders/All-Disorders/Stroke-Information-Page )  (   https://www.stroke.org/ )  Use of UpToDate is subject to the   Terms of Use .  This generalized information is a limited summary of diagnosis, treatment, and/or  medication information. It is not meant to be comprehensive and should be used as a  National Library of Medicine ●  National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke ●  American Stroke Association ● 04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 10 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  tool to help the user understand and/or assess potential diagnostic and treatment  options. It does NOT include all information about conditions, treatments, medications,  side effects, or risks that may apply to a specific patient. It is not intended to be medical  advice or a substitute for the medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment of a health care  provider based on the health care provider's examination and assessment of a patient's  specific and unique circumstances. Patients must speak with a health care provider for  complete information about their health, medical questions, and treatment options,  including any risks or benefits regarding use of medications. This information does not  endorse any treatments or medications as safe, effective, or approved for treating a  specific patient. UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates disclaim any warranty or liability relating  to this information or the use thereof. The use of this information is governed by the  Terms of Use, available at   https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en/know/clinical-  effectiveness-terms   ©2023 UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates and/or licensors. All rights  reserved.  Topic 726 Version 35.0 04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 11 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  GRAPHICS  BE FAST to help remember stroke symptoms 04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 12 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  One way to help remember stroke symptoms is to think of the words "BE FAST."  If a person shows any of these signs,   call for an ambulance right away   (in the  US and Canada,   call 9-1-1 ).  Graphic 73487 Version 9.0 04.07.2023 09.26 Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 13 af 13 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/stroke-symptoms-and-diagnosis-…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link   