04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 1 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperthyroidism-overactive-thyr…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Official reprint from UpToDate  www.uptodate.com   © 2023 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.  Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive  thyroid) (Beyond the Basics)  Please read the   Disclaimer   at the end of this page.  HYPERTHYROIDISM OVERVIEW  Hyperthyroidism is the medical term for an overactive thyroid (the prefix "hyper" means  excessive). In people with hyperthyroidism, the thyroid gland produces too much thyroid  hormone. When this occurs, the body's metabolism is increased, which can cause a variety  of symptoms.  This topic discusses the symptoms, diagnostic tests, and treatment options for  hyperthyroidism. Hypothyroidism (a different condition in which the thyroid gland  produces too   little   thyroid hormone) is discussed in a separate topic. (See   "Patient  education: Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics)" .)  WHAT IS THE THYROID?  The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the middle of the neck, located below the larynx  (voice box) and above the clavicles (collarbones) (   figure 1 ). The thyroid produces two  hormones, triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4), that regulate how the body uses and  stores energy (also known as the body's metabolism).  ®  author :   Douglas S Ross, MD  section   editor :   David S Cooper, MD  deputy   editor :   Jean E Mulder, MD  All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our   peer review process   is complete.  Literature review current through:   Jun 2023.  This topic last updated:   Jan 03, 2023. 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 2 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperthyroidism-overactive-thyr…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  The thyroid is controlled by a gland just below the brain, known as the pituitary. The  pituitary produces thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), which in turn causes the thyroid  gland to make T3 and T4. When the levels of T4 and T3 levels in the body are low,  production of TSH increases in order to bring the levels up; when levels are high, TSH  decreases.  HYPERTHYROIDISM CAUSES  Graves' disease   —   Graves' disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism. It is not  clear why Graves' disease develops in most people, although it is more common in certain  families.  In people with Graves' disease, the immune system produces an antibody that behaves like  TSH in that it stimulates the thyroid gland to produce too much thyroid hormone. This is  most common in women between the ages of 20 and 40 years but can occur at any age in  men or women. The thyroid gland enlarges (called a goiter) (   figure 2 ) and makes  excessive amounts of thyroid hormone, causing symptoms of hyperthyroidism. (See  'Hyperthyroidism symptoms'   below.)  Some people develop eye problems (called Graves' ophthalmopathy, orbitopathy, or simply  thyroid eye disease); this causes dry, irritated, or red eyes and, in severe cases, may cause  double vision. Other people develop swelling behind or around the eyes that causes the  eyes to bulge out or inflammation of muscle in the eyelids that can cause excessive lid  swelling or opening (   figure 2 ). The more severe manifestations of Graves' eye disease  are uncommon, except in people who smoke. In its most severe form, people with thyroid  eye disease can develop inflammation of the optic nerves, which can result in loss of vision.  Other causes  One or more thyroid nodules (small growths or lumps in the thyroid gland) can  produce too much thyroid hormone. The nodule is then called a hot nodule, toxic  nodule, or, when there is more than one, a toxic nodular goiter. (See   "Patient  education: Thyroid nodules (Beyond the Basics)" .)  ●  Painless ("silent or lymphocytic") thyroiditis and postpartum thyroiditis are disorders  in which the thyroid becomes temporarily inflamed and releases thyroid hormone  stores into the bloodstream, causing hyperthyroidism.  ● 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 3 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperthyroidism-overactive-thyr…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  HYPERTHYROIDISM SYMPTOMS  Most people with hyperthyroidism have symptoms, including one or more of the following:  In addition, some women have irregular menstrual periods or stop having their periods  altogether. This can be associated with infertility. Men may develop enlarged or tender  breasts or erectile dysfunction, which resolves when hyperthyroidism is treated.  HYPERTHYROIDISM DIAGNOSIS  Hyperthyroidism can be diagnosed with blood tests that measure the amount of thyroid  hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Typically, the thyroid hormone level is  Postpartum thyroiditis can occur several months after delivery. The hyperthyroid  symptoms may last for several months, often followed by several months of  hypothyroid symptoms, such as fatigue, muscle cramps, bloating, and weight gain.  Subacute (granulomatous) thyroiditis is thought to be caused by a virus. It causes a  painful, tender, enlarged thyroid gland. The thyroid becomes inflamed and releases  thyroid hormone into the blood stream; the hyperthyroidism resolves when the viral  infection improves and may also be followed by several months of hypothyroid  symptoms. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has been associated with subacute  thyroiditis.  ●  Taking too much thyroid hormone medication for hypothyroidism increases blood  levels into the range seen in people with hyperthyroidism.  ●  Anxiety, irritability, trouble sleeping ●  Weakness (in particular of the upper arms and thighs, making it difficult to lift heavy  items or climb stairs or get up from a chair)  ●  Tremors (of the hands) ●  Perspiring more than normal, difficulty tolerating hot weather ●  Rapid, forceful, or irregular heartbeats ●  Fatigue ●  Weight loss in spite of a normal or increased appetite ●  Frequent bowel movements ● 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 4 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperthyroidism-overactive-thyr…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  high, and the TSH level is low. A thyroid scan or a blood test for the antibody that causes  Graves' disease may also be recommended to help determine whether hyperthyroidism is  caused by Graves' disease, toxic nodular goiter, or thyroiditis.  HYPERTHYROIDISM TREATMENT  Hyperthyroidism can be treated using medicine, radioiodine, or surgery. Many factors,  such as your age and the severity and type of hyperthyroidism, as well as your preferences,  are important in determining which treatment is best.  Medications   —   The two main types of medicines used to treat hyperthyroidism are  antithyroid drugs and beta blockers.  Antithyroid drugs   —   Antithyroid drugs, such as   methimazole   (brand name: Tapazole)  and   propylthiouracil , work by decreasing how much thyroid hormone the body makes.  Both are very effective, but methimazole is preferred because of a greater risk of serious  side effects with propylthiouracil. Carbimazole is similar to methimazole and is used in  many countries but not in the United States.  Because   methimazole   can be associated with serious birth defects if taken during  pregnancy,   propylthiouracil   is the preferred drug during the first trimester; while  propylthiouracil can also be associated with birth defects, they are less severe. For  hyperthyroidism presenting after the first trimester, methimazole is preferred. (See  "Patient education: Antithyroid drugs (Beyond the Basics)" .)  If your health care provider prescribes an antithyroid drug, they will talk to you about how  to take it and the possible side effects. (See   "Patient education: Antithyroid drugs (Beyond  the Basics)" .)  Beta blockers   —   Beta blockers, such as   atenolol   or   propranolol , are often started as soon  as the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism is made. While beta blockers do not reduce thyroid  hormone production, they can control many of the bothersome symptoms, such as rapid  heart rate, tremors, anxiety, and heat intolerance. Once the hyperthyroidism is under  control (with antithyroid drugs, surgery, or radioiodine), the beta blocker is stopped.  Radioiodine   —   Destroying the thyroid with radioiodine, called ablation, is a permanent  way to treat hyperthyroidism. The amount of radiation used is small and does not cause 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 5 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperthyroidism-overactive-thyr…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  cancer, infertility, or birth defects.  Radioiodine is given in liquid or capsule form, and it works by destroying much of the  thyroid tissue. This takes approximately 6 to 18 weeks. People with severe symptoms, older  adults, and people with heart problems should first be treated with an antithyroid drug to  control symptoms. Most people who take radioiodine develop hypothyroidism and will  need to take thyroid hormone supplements for the rest of their lives. (See   "Patient  education: Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics)" .)  As with most treatments, there are some risks with radioiodine:  People who are treated with radioiodine should avoid close physical contact, especially  with young children and pregnant people, for five to seven days after treatment because of  the possibility of exposing them to low doses of radiation. This can be difficult for parents  of young children.  You will need to see your health care provider on a regular basis after treatment to have  your thyroid hormone levels checked and monitor for hypothyroidism or recurrent  hyperthyroidism.  Surgery   —   Although surgical removal of the thyroid is a permanent cure for  hyperthyroidism, it is used far less often than antithyroid drugs because of the risks (and  expense) associated with thyroid surgery. The risks include damage to the nerves to the  voice box and damage to the parathyroid glands, which regulate the body's calcium  balance.  However, surgery is recommended when:  Sometimes, after apparently successful treatment, the condition returns, and further  treatment is needed.  ●  Approximately 14 percent of people who use radioiodine treatment require a second  dose. These people usually have severe hyperthyroidism or a very large goiter.  ●  Twice as many patients who receive radioiodine experience worsening of their eye  disease compared with patients who have surgery.  ●  A large goiter blocks the airways, making it difficult to breathe ●  You cannot tolerate antithyroid drugs and you do not want to use radioiodine ● 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 6 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperthyroidism-overactive-thyr…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  The follow-up after surgery includes regular appointments to test your thyroid hormone  levels and monitor for signs of hypo- and hyperthyroidism. Almost everyone develops  hypothyroidism after surgery and requires treatment with thyroid hormone. (See   "Patient  education: Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics)" .)  PREGNANCY AND HYPERTHYROIDISM  If you take antithyroid drugs and are considering future pregnancy, you should discuss  your treatment with your health care provider before trying to get pregnant. There are  risks to the mother and developing baby if hyperthyroidism is not well controlled; these  risks can be avoided or minimized with frequent monitoring and medication adjustment  throughout the pregnancy.  People who are pregnant or breastfeeding should not be treated with radioiodine. Having  radioiodine treatment or surgery before becoming pregnant   usually   eliminates the need  for antithyroid drugs and any possible associated risks. A person should wait at least six  months after radioiodine treatment before trying to become pregnant.  WHERE TO GET MORE INFORMATION  Your health care provider is the best source of information for questions and concerns  related to your medical problem.  This article will be updated as needed on our website (   www.uptodate.com/patients ).  Related topics for patients, as well as selected articles written for health care professionals,  are also available. Some of the most relevant are listed below.  Patient level information   —   UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials.  The Basics   —   The Basics patient education pieces answer the four or five key questions a  patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a  general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials.  There is a nodule in the thyroid gland that could be cancer ●  You have active Graves' eye disease ●  In people desiring pregnancy who want definitive treatment before conceiving ● 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 7 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperthyroidism-overactive-thyr…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (The Basics)  Patient education: Thyroid nodules (The Basics)  Patient education: Congenital hypothyroidism (The Basics)  Patient education: Nodular goiter (The Basics)  Patient education: Pituitary adenoma (The Basics)  Patient education: Periodic paralysis syndrome (The Basics)  Patient education: Thyroiditis after pregnancy (The Basics)  Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) and pregnancy (The Basics)  Patient education: Thyroiditis (The Basics)  Beyond the Basics   —   Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more  sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are best for patients who want in-depth  information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.  Patient education: Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Thyroid nodules (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Antithyroid drugs (Beyond the Basics)  Professional level information   —   Professional level articles are designed to keep doctors  and other health professionals up-to-date on the latest medical findings. These articles are  thorough, long, and complex, and they contain multiple references to the research on  which they are based. Professional level articles are best for people who are comfortable  with a lot of medical terminology and who want to read the same materials their doctors  are reading.  Amiodarone and thyroid dysfunction  Beta blockers in the treatment of hyperthyroidism  Bone disease with hyperthyroidism and thyroid hormone therapy  Cardiovascular effects of hyperthyroidism  Hyperthyroidism during pregnancy: Clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and causes  Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of Graves disease in children and adolescents  Hyperthyroidism during pregnancy: Treatment  Diagnosis of hyperthyroidism  Disorders that cause hyperthyroidism  Evaluation and management of neonatal Graves disease  Exogenous hyperthyroidism  Iodinated radiocontrast agents in the treatment of hyperthyroidism 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 8 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperthyroidism-overactive-thyr…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Iodine in the treatment of hyperthyroidism  Neurologic manifestations of hyperthyroidism and Graves' disease  Overview of the clinical manifestations of hyperthyroidism in adults  Radioiodine in the treatment of hyperthyroidism  Subclinical hyperthyroidism in nonpregnant adults  Surgical management of hyperthyroidism  Thionamides in the treatment of Graves' disease  Graves' hyperthyroidism in nonpregnant adults: Overview of treatment  The following organizations also provide reliable health information.  [ 1,2 ]  Use of UpToDate is subject to the   Terms of Use .  This generalized information is a limited summary of diagnosis, treatment, and/or  medication information. It is not meant to be comprehensive and should be used as a  tool to help the user understand and/or assess potential diagnostic and treatment  options. It does NOT include all information about conditions, treatments, medications,  side effects, or risks that may apply to a specific patient. It is not intended to be medical  advice or a substitute for the medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment of a health care  provider based on the health care provider's examination and assessment of a patient's  National Library of Medicine ●  (   www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/healthtopics.html )  The American Thyroid Association ●  (   www.thyroid.org )  Thyroid Foundation of Canada ●  (   www.thyroid.ca )  Hormone Health Network ●  (   www.hormone.org , available in English and Spanish) 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 9 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperthyroidism-overactive-thyr…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  specific and unique circumstances. Patients must speak with a health care provider for  complete information about their health, medical questions, and treatment options,  including any risks or benefits regarding use of medications. This information does not  endorse any treatments or medications as safe, effective, or approved for treating a  specific patient. UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates disclaim any warranty or liability relating  to this information or the use thereof. The use of this information is governed by the  Terms of Use, available at   https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en/know/clinical-  effectiveness-terms   ©2023 UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates and/or licensors. All rights  reserved.  Topic 2178 Version 26.0 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 10 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperthyroidism-overactive-thyr…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  GRAPHICS  Thyroid and parathyroid glands  The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the middle of the neck. It sits just  below the larynx (voice box). The thyroid makes 2 hormones, called T3 and  T4, which control how the body uses and stores energy. The parathyroid  glands are 4 small glands behind the thyroid. They make a hormone called  parathyroid hormone, which helps control the amount of calcium in the  blood.  T3: triiodothyronine; T4: thyroxine.  Graphic 66834 Version 10.0 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 11 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperthyroidism-overactive-thyr…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Hyperthyroidism  Hyperthyroidism is when the thyroid gland in the neck is "overactive" and  makes too much thyroid hormone. This can cause a swelling in the neck, called  a "goiter." If hyperthyroidism is caused by a medical condition called Graves'  disease, it can also make the eyes bulge out.  Graphic 58509 Version 9.0 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 12 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperthyroidism-overactive-thyr…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link   