04.07.2023 09.28 Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal heartbeats (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 1 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/catheter-ablation-for-abnormal-…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Official reprint from UpToDate  www.uptodate.com   © 2023 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.  Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal  heartbeats (Beyond the Basics)  Please read the   Disclaimer   at the end of this page.  CATHETER ABLATION OVERVIEW  Catheter ablation is a procedure that is performed to correct a disturbance in heart  rhythm. It may involve either radiofrequency energy or freezing (cryoablation) (see   'What is  catheter ablation?'   below). Catheter ablation can treat many abnormal, typically rapid  and/or irregular heart rhythms.  A brief review of the normal heart rhythm and description of some of the rhythm problems  treated with ablation will help in the understanding of this technique.  How does the heart normally work?   —   Heart muscle cells in the atria (top part of the  heart) and ventricles (bottom part of the heart) are stimulated by electrical impulses that  cause them to contract in a uniform way and with a regular rate. This contraction produces  the heartbeat, which causes blood to be pumped out of the heart and into all parts of the  body. The flow of blood into arteries can be measured by feeling the pulse, which  corresponds to the heartbeat.  In the normal heart, electrical impulses arise from an area of specialized cells called the  sinus node, which is the heart's normal pacemaker. The sinus node is located in the right  ®  author :   Brian Olshansky, MD  section   editor :   Bernard J Gersh, MB, ChB, DPhil, FRCP, MACC  deputy   editor :   Nisha Parikh, MD, MPH  All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our   peer review process   is complete.  Literature review current through:   Jun 2023.  This topic last updated:   Jun 13, 2022. 04.07.2023 09.28 Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal heartbeats (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 2 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/catheter-ablation-for-abnormal-…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  atrium, the upper right chamber of the heart (   figure 1 ). After leaving the sinus node, an  impulse spreads across the upper heart chambers (right and left atria) and reaches the  atrioventricular (AV) node located near the center of the heart between the atria and the  lower chambers, or ventricles, and then to conduction fibers that spread across the  ventricles, which are the heart's main pumping chambers. As the impulse moves along the  electrical conduction pathways, cardiac muscle cells are stimulated and contract, producing  a heartbeat (   figure 2 ).  Sometimes, the electrical impulses "short circuit" the normal pathway and travel across the  heart in an abnormal way. Abnormal pathways (or routes) for the impulses can cause  abnormalities in the heartbeat, also known as arrhythmias or heart rhythm disturbances.  In other cases, arrhythmias arise when areas other than the sinus node become active and  begin to send out impulses that either compete with or take over the normal function of  the sinus node. Typically, the result of these abnormalities is a heartbeat that is too fast or  irregular. This may develop in any location within the atria, AV node, or ventricles. When  the fast rhythm requires tissue from the upper part of the heart, it is known as  supraventricular tachycardia. When it requires tissue from the lower chambers only, it is  known as ventricular tachycardia.  WHAT IS CATHETER ABLATION?  Catheter ablation can cure many types of fast heart rhythms. Using special coated wires  that are moved to the heart, usually from the blood vessels in the groin, the abnormal  heart rhythm is mapped and localized. Then radiofrequency energy (low-voltage, high-  frequency electricity) or freezing is targeted toward the area(s), causing the abnormal heart  rhythm, permanently damaging small areas of tissue. Other energy delivery systems are  being developed.  The damaged tissue is no longer capable of generating or conducting electrical impulses. If  successful, the arrhythmia stops and the problem is cured.  In some patients, insertion of a pacemaker is a planned part of the procedure. In other  cases, the need for a pacemaker is a complication of the ablation procedure. A doctor can  tell whether a pacemaker is needed during the procedure. (See   "Patient education:  Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics)" .) 04.07.2023 09.28 Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal heartbeats (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 3 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/catheter-ablation-for-abnormal-…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  WHICH RHYTHM PROBLEMS CAN BE TREATED?  Catheter ablation can be used to treat many arrhythmias that cause a fast heartbeat.  Catheter ablation may be recommended for:  THE CATHETER ABLATION PROCEDURE  Preparation   —   Patients may be asked to discontinue certain medications in the days  before the procedure. In some cases, an imaging test of the heart, usually an  echocardiogram, may be done in advance of the ablation procedure. Most patients are  advised to stop eating and drinking at midnight the night before the procedure. A  pregnancy test is usually done immediately before the procedure in women of child-  bearing capacity because x-radiation is sometimes used.  Procedure   —   Before the procedure begins, a sedative medication is given through an  intravenous (IV) line. Because this type of sedation is usually fairly deep, many patients are  not aware of what is happening during the procedure.  Small coated wires ("catheters") are inserted into a blood vessel and then moved into the  heart to locate the problem and sometimes to start up the abnormal rhythm. The wires are  usually inserted into the femoral vein or artery, in the inner thigh, and are then positioned  Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, which includes: ●  Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (see   "Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White  syndrome (Beyond the Basics)" )  •  AV nodal reentrant tachycardia •  Atrial tachycardia •  Atrial flutter ●  Inappropriate sinus tachycardia ●  Ventricular tachycardia and premature ventricular contractions ●  Atrial fibrillation (see   "Patient education: Atrial fibrillation (Beyond the Basics)" ) ● 04.07.2023 09.28 Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal heartbeats (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 4 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/catheter-ablation-for-abnormal-…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  within the chambers of the heart using fluoroscopy (low-energy x-rays) or other  techniques. Occasionally, catheters are inserted through veins into the side of the neck,  upper chest, or arm. The doctor will test various parts of the heart and usually will try to  provoke the arrhythmia.  The sections of the heart that are causing your arrhythmia are identified (   figure 1 ). The  right atrium and ventricle are reached through the femoral vein (in the thigh). If left atrial  access is necessary, a small hole is made in the wall between the right atrium and left  atrium. After identifying the cause of the arrhythmia, the doctor will then use the  radiofrequency energy (heat or electrocautery) or cryoablation (freezing) to treat the  problem area. During the procedure, the heart rate and rhythm, oxygen level, and blood  pressure will be monitored.  When the procedure is completed, the doctor may try to cause the arrhythmia to occur. If it  cannot be initiated, the procedure is considered a success. However, if the arrhythmia can  still be initiated, additional radiofrequency energy or freezing is delivered.  The length of the procedure varies from patient to patient, depending upon the type of  arrhythmia being treated and other factors. Typically, the procedure lasts two hours or  more.  Post-ablation care   —   You will be taken to a recovery area while the effects of the sedative  medication wear off. The catheter site will be monitored for bleeding and the heart rhythm  is observed closely during this period. You must stay in bed for several hours to reduce the  risk of bleeding from the catheter site. You usually feel tired but well. Pain medication is  usually needed for only a short time, if at all.  Some patients are admitted to the hospital after the procedure while others go home later  the same day. Certain activities are not recommended for a brief period to avoid straining  the catheter site.  You may be asked to take   aspirin   every day for several weeks after the procedure to  prevent blood clots. After some ablations, a more powerful blood thinning medication is  required (anticoagulant). The doctor will give more detailed information about medications  needed after the procedure.  CATHETER ABLATION COMPLICATIONS 04.07.2023 09.28 Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal heartbeats (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 5 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/catheter-ablation-for-abnormal-…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Like any invasive procedure, catheter ablation carries some risk. However, the risk of these  complications is small in most cases.  Possible complications include:  OTHER ARRHYTHMIA TREATMENTS  Other arrhythmia treatments may be available, depending in part on what type of  arrhythmia is present. Medication, pacemakers, cardioversion (delivering an electrical  current to the chest to restore a normal rhythm), and surgery are examples of treatments  that may be used for particular arrhythmias. (See   "Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond  the Basics)"   and   "Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics)" .)  Some types of arrhythmias are temporary and non-life-threatening. Patients can be taught  certain maneuvers (such as coughing or increasing pressure in the abdomen) that may  stop the arrhythmia. Detailed information about available alternative therapies is available  Problems related to moving the catheters through the blood vessels such as  bleeding, infection, blood clots, bruising, and injury to the vessel(s).  ●  Injury to the heart as a result of the catheters; this includes a heart attack, perforation  through the muscle, or damage to one of the valves within the heart. In some cases, a  pacemaker is expected, but for others a pacemaker may be needed even if not  expected.  ●  Blood clots that travel to the lungs (pulmonary embolism) or brain (stroke). ●  Heart block or failure of any electrical impulse to travel from the top parts of the  heart to the bottom. This complication, if permanent, requires implantation of a  pacemaker.  ●  New arrhythmias. ●  Exposure to radiation during the procedure. This can produce a very small increase in  the risk of cancer or genetic defects. Efforts are made to limit radiation exposure  during ablation procedures.  ●  Death (occurs in approximately 0.1 percent of cases). ● 04.07.2023 09.28 Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal heartbeats (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 6 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/catheter-ablation-for-abnormal-…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  from a healthcare provider.  WHERE TO GET MORE INFORMATION  Your healthcare provider is the best source of information for questions and concerns  related to your medical problem.  This article will be updated as needed on our web site (   www.uptodate.com/patients ).  Related topics for patients, as well as selected articles written for healthcare professionals,  are also available. Some of the most relevant are listed below.  Patient level information   —   UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials.  The Basics   —   The Basics patient education pieces answer the four or five key questions a  patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a  general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials.  Patient education: Catheter ablation for the heart (The Basics)  Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (The Basics)  Patient education: Heart failure and atrial fibrillation (The Basics)  Patient education: Atrial flutter (The Basics)  Patient education: Ventricular fibrillation (The Basics)  Beyond the Basics   —   Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more  sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are best for patients who want in-depth  information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.  Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Atrial fibrillation (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics)  Professional level information   —   Professional level articles are designed to keep doctors  and other health professionals up-to-date on the latest medical findings. These articles are  thorough, long, and complex, and they contain multiple references to the research on  which they are based. Professional level articles are best for people who are comfortable  with a lot of medical terminology and who want to read the same materials their doctors 04.07.2023 09.28 Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal heartbeats (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 7 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/catheter-ablation-for-abnormal-…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  are reading.  Atrial fibrillation: Catheter ablation  Overview of catheter ablation of cardiac arrhythmias, section on 'Introduction'  The following organizations also provide reliable health information.  (   www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/healthtopics.html )  (   www.nhlbi.nih.gov/ )  (   www.americanheart.org )  (   www.hrsonline.org )  [ 1-3 ]  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  The UpToDate editorial staff acknowledges Leonard Ganz, MD, FHRS, FACC, who  contributed to an earlier version of this topic review.  Use of UpToDate is subject to the   Terms of Use .  This generalized information is a limited summary of diagnosis, treatment, and/or  medication information. It is not meant to be comprehensive and should be used as a  tool to help the user understand and/or assess potential diagnostic and treatment  options. It does NOT include all information about conditions, treatments, medications,  side effects, or risks that may apply to a specific patient. It is not intended to be medical  advice or a substitute for the medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment of a health care  National Library of Medicine ●  National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute ●  American Heart Association ●  Heart Rhythm Society ● 04.07.2023 09.28 Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal heartbeats (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 8 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/catheter-ablation-for-abnormal-…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  provider based on the health care provider's examination and assessment of a patient's  specific and unique circumstances. Patients must speak with a health care provider for  complete information about their health, medical questions, and treatment options,  including any risks or benefits regarding use of medications. This information does not  endorse any treatments or medications as safe, effective, or approved for treating a  specific patient. UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates disclaim any warranty or liability relating  to this information or the use thereof. The use of this information is governed by the  Terms of Use, available at   https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en/know/clinical-  effectiveness-terms   ©2023 UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates and/or licensors. All rights  reserved.  Topic 3449 Version 24.0 04.07.2023 09.28 Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal heartbeats (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 9 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/catheter-ablation-for-abnormal-…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  GRAPHICS  Anatomy of the interior of the heart  Graphic 77576 Version 4.0 04.07.2023 09.28 Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal heartbeats (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 10 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/catheter-ablation-for-abnormal-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  The conduction system of the heart  The heart has its own built-in electrical system, called the conduction system.  The conduction system sends electrical signals throughout the heart that  determine the timing of the heartbeat and cause the heart to beat in a  coordinated, rhythmic pattern. The electrical signals, or impulses, of the heart  are generated by a clump of specialized tissue called the sinus node. Each time  the sinus node generates a new electrical impulse, that impulse spreads out  through the heart's upper chambers, called the right atrium and the left  atrium. This electrical impulse, as it spreads across the two atria, stimulates  them to contract, pumping blood into the right and left ventricles. The  electrical impulse then spreads to the atrioventricular (AV) node, which is  another clump of specialized tissue located between the atria and the  ventricles. The AV node momentarily slows down the spread of the electrical  impulse, to allow the left and right atria to finish contracting. From the AV  node, the impulse spreads into a system of specialized fibers called the His  bundle and the right and left bundle branches. These fibers distribute the  electrical impulse rapidly to all areas of the right and left ventricles, stimulating  them to contract in a coordinated way. With this contraction, blood is pumped  from the right ventricle to the lungs, and from the left ventricle throughout the  body.  Graphic 71235 Version 3.0 04.07.2023 09.28 Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal heartbeats (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 11 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/catheter-ablation-for-abnormal-…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link   