04.07.2023 09.08 The role of pacemakers in the prevention of atrial fibrillation - UpToDate  Side 1 af 10 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/the-role-of-pacemakers-in-the-…h _ result&selectedTitle=23~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=22  Official reprint from UpToDate  www.uptodate.com   © 2023 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.  The role of pacemakers in the prevention of atrial  fibrillation  INTRODUCTION  The principal reason to place a pacemaker in a patient with atrial fibrillation (AF) is to treat  symptomatic bradycardia. Pacing has not been shown to prevent the development of AF.  This topic will review the role of pacemakers in the prevention of AF. Brief mention will be  given to implantable cardioverter defibrillators. The utility of other nonpharmacologic  strategies for preventing AF is discussed separately. (See   "Atrial fibrillation: Catheter  ablation"   and   "Atrial fibrillation: Surgical ablation" .)  PATIENTS WITHOUT AN INDICATION FOR A PACEMAKER  In patients with a history of atrial fibrillation (AF), pacing from one or both atria has been  suggested as a means to reduce AF recurrences. There is no conclusive evidence to  support the implantation of an atrial pacemaker to prevent AF in patients with a history of  AF but no indication for pacing [ 1 ]. Similar to societal guidelines, we do not recommend the  insertion of an atrial pacemaker for this purpose [ 2 ]. (See   'Overdrive (antitachycardia) atrial  pacing'   below.)  ®  author :   Rod Passman, MD, MSCE  section   editor :   Bradley P Knight, MD, FACC  deputy   editor :   Nisha Parikh, MD, MPH  All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our   peer review process   is complete.  Literature review current through:   Jun 2023.  This topic last updated:   Jun 14, 2022. 04.07.2023 09.08 The role of pacemakers in the prevention of atrial fibrillation - UpToDate  Side 2 af 10 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/the-role-of-pacemakers-in-the-…h _ result&selectedTitle=23~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=22  PATIENTS WITH SYMPTOMATIC BRADYCARDIA  Many patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) have sinus node dysfunction with symptomatic  bradycardia requiring pacemaker placement. Moreover, antiarrhythmic drug treatment  may lead to sinus or atrioventricular nodal dysfunction that may require pacing in order to  permit up-titration of drug dose. The appropriate pacing modes for patients with sinus  node dysfunction are discussed separately. (See   "Sinus node dysfunction: Treatment",  section on 'Treatment' .)  In patients who require permanent pacing, only physiologic pacing from the right atrium  has been shown to prevent episodes of AF.  Physiologic pacing  Background   —   The term "physiologic pacing" has historically been used to describe the  maintenance of atrioventricular (AV) synchrony.  For patients with non-permanent AF who require permanent pacing, we place a dual  chamber pacemaker and program it to physiologic pacing, which is discussed below.  Physiologic pacing results in a significantly lower rate of AF.  Sinus rhythm leads to a predictable myocardial activation sequence of different regions of  the heart. This sequence optimizes cardiac output. Several mechanisms may contribute to  the benefit of physiologic pacing in preventing AF in patients who are treated with  standard dual-chamber pacing. (See   "The electrocardiogram in atrial fibrillation" .)  Types of physiologic pacing and their benefits are summarized as follows:  Maintenance of AV synchrony   – This lowers the potential for AF by preventing the  development of right atrial electrical and left atrial mechanical remodeling [ 3-5 ].  ●  His bundle pacing   – Compared with right ventricular (RV) pacing, His bundle pacing  may reduce left atrial dysfunction by preventing left ventricular (LV) dyssynchrony and  reducing LV compliance [ 6 ].  ●  Reductions in the dispersion of refractoriness   – These reductions may be in part  due to lowering average atrial pressure and therefore stretch-related changes [ 7 ].  Another factor may be suppression of ectopic atrial premature beats that can initiate  ● 04.07.2023 09.08 The role of pacemakers in the prevention of atrial fibrillation - UpToDate  Side 3 af 10 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/the-role-of-pacemakers-in-the-…h _ result&selectedTitle=23~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=22  There are several adverse physiologic effects of pacing the RV.   Isolated RV pacing disrupts  the normal sequence of activation of the atria and ventricles in patients in normal sinus  rhythm. This can cause both AV and RV dyssynchrony, which are both described below:  Evidence for efficacy of physiologic pacing  His bundle versus RV pacing   —   There may be a beneficial role of His bundle pacing  in the prevention of AF or for reduction of AF burden in those with pacing indications;  however, this has not been definitively established [ 11,12 ]. A retrospective study of 410  patients without AF who were referred for permanent pacemaker and followed for an  average of 1.6 years showed that those with left bundle branch area pacing had less new-  onset AF compared with those with RV pacing (5.2 versus 18 percent; hazard ratio [HR]  0.33, 95% CI 0.16-0.67) [ 6 ]. (See   "Modes of cardiac pacing: Nomenclature and selection",  section on 'Physiologic pacing'   and   "Modes of cardiac pacing: Nomenclature and selection",  section on 'Modes to minimize ventricular pacing' .)  Atrial versus ventricular pacing   —   The potential benefit of physiologic pacing on  the development of AF has been evaluated in a number of clinical trials [ 13-23 ]. Physiologic  pacing may be accomplished with atrial or AV pacing, which is also referred to as dual-  chamber pacing.  A 2006 meta-analysis of randomized trials of physiologic versus ventricular pacing included  7231 patients and over 35,000 patient-years of follow-up [ 13 ]. Most patients assigned to  physiologic pacing received a dual-chamber (DDD) pacemaker, and some received AAI  pacing. Physiologic pacing resulted in a significantly lower rate of AF (HR 0.80, 95% CI 0.72-  AF [ 8,9 ].  AV dyssynchrony   – The failure to activate the atria before the ventricles with RV  pacing is termed AV dyssynchrony. AV dyssynchrony may promote AF. Preventing AV  dyssynchrony is part of the rationale for atrial pacing in patients with paroxysmal AF.  ●  Ventricular dyssynchrony   – RV pacing causes the RV to contract before the LV and  causes the septum to contract before the lateral wall of the LV; this sequence for  activation is similar to that of a native left bundle branch block. The phenomenon is  referred to as ventricular dyssynchrony or asynchrony and can also lead to AF.  Therefore, the risk of AF with pacing can be reduced by maintaining AV synchrony  (physiologic pacing) and by minimizing the amount of ventricular pacing [ 10 ].  ● 04.07.2023 09.08 The role of pacemakers in the prevention of atrial fibrillation - UpToDate  Side 4 af 10 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/the-role-of-pacemakers-in-the-…h _ result&selectedTitle=23~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=22  0.89). However, there was no significant reduction in mortality or heart failure. Another trial  not included in the meta-analysis has come to similar conclusions [ 18 ].  Site of atrial pacing   —   The impact of the site of atrial pacing was evaluated in the  SAFE study of 385 patients with paroxysmal AF and sinus node dysfunction with an  indication for long-term pacing [ 24 ]. Individuals were randomly assigned to pacing at the  right atrial appendage or the right septum. After a mean follow-up of 3.1 years, there was  no difference in the rate of occurrence of persistent AF between the two sites.  Alternate strategies   —   As discussed above, we place a dual chamber pacemaker in  patients with non-permanent AF who have symptomatic bradycardia and no indication for  biventricular pacing. When possible, we pace from the right atrium only. While attempting  physiologic pacing has been standard of care for decades, data suggests a physiologic  benefit of His bundle pacing when feasible [ 11 ]. (See   "Sinus node dysfunction: Treatment",  section on 'Long-term management' .)  The ability of other atrial pacing systems to suppress AF recurrences has been evaluated in  several studies and has not been found to prevent the development of AF.  Alternative-site, dual-site right atrial, and biatrial pacing   —   Based on the available  evidence, we do not perform alternative site, dual-site right atrial, or biatrial pacing to  prevent episodes of AF.  The atria can be paced at sites other than the right atrial appendage, such as at the high  interatrial septum near Bachman’s bundle, or at two sites simultaneously to provide  greater synchronization of atrial tissue, which might protect against AF. Biatrial pacing  usually involves pacing simultaneously from a lead in the right atrial appendage to  stimulate the right atrium and a lead in the coronary sinus to stimulate the left atrium [ 25 ].  Alternatively, two sites in the right atrium can be paced simultaneously (eg, the high right  atrium and low on the interatrial septum near the coronary sinus ostium) [ 26 ].  The following summarizes the lack of robust evidence for efficacy of alternative pacing  strategies:  Dual versus single site   atrial pacing –   Possible mechanisms by which arrhythmia  recurrence rates are lowered with dual-site pacing include a reduction in atrial  conduction delay and a smaller increase in the width of the atrial electrogram caused  by an early premature beat, measured at the right posterior interatrial septum.  ● 04.07.2023 09.08 The role of pacemakers in the prevention of atrial fibrillation - UpToDate  Side 5 af 10 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/the-role-of-pacemakers-in-the-…h _ result&selectedTitle=23~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=22  Overdrive (antitachycardia) atrial pacing   —   We consider using overdrive atrial pacing  in patients with frequent, symptomatic episodes of AF whose episodes have been difficult  to manage with rate or rhythm control. (See   'Patients without an indication for a  pacemaker'   above.)  The rationale for overdrive or antitachycardia pacing that predominates over intrinsic atrial  activity is that triggering of AF might be reduced by affecting the pattern of atrial  depolarization and suppressing atrial premature beats. Initial studies produced variable  results [ 25 ]. This was followed by the development of complex algorithms that keep the  pacing rate slightly faster than the intrinsic atrial rate in an attempt to minimize the  sudden rate change that occurs after premature beats.  Whereas smaller observational studies suggested a benefit of dual-site versus single-  site pacing [ 27-31 ], in the larger DAPPAF trial [ 26 ], no benefit was observed. In the  DAPPAF trial, 118 patients with paroxysmal symptomatic AF and a bradyarrhythmic  indication for pacing were randomly assigned to each of three pacing modes: right  atrial, dual-site right atrial, and support (DDI or VDI) pacing [ 26 ]. Although there were  no overall differences in incident AF among patients assigned to these pacing groups,  subgroup analysis suggested that dual-site pacing was more effective than single-site  or support pacing in patients receiving a class I or III antiarrhythmic drug and in  those with   ≤ 1 symptomatic AF episode per week.  Pacing from specific sites in right atrium and coronary sinus   – In the PASTA trial  142 patients with pacing indications were randomly assigned to pacing from either  the free right atrial wall, right atrial appendage, coronary sinus ostium, or dual site  right atrial pacing from the coronary sinus ostium and the right atrial appendage  [ 31 ]. There was no statistically significant difference with respect to the occurrence of  AF between the four groups after 24 months.  ●  Intraatrial septal versus right atrial   pacing   – A meta-analysis of 12 randomized  controlled trials enrolling 1146 patients compared right atrial appendage pacing with  interatrial septum pacing. Compared with right atrial appendage pacing, interatrial  septum pacing was associated with a reduction in the number of AF episodes and  burden. However, the development of permanent AF and the prevalence of recurrent  AF were similar between the two pacing modes [ 32 ].  ●  Proprietary pacing algorithms   – Some combinations of proprietary pacing ● 04.07.2023 09.08 The role of pacemakers in the prevention of atrial fibrillation - UpToDate  Side 6 af 10 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/the-role-of-pacemakers-in-the-…h _ result&selectedTitle=23~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=22  algorithms designed to both prevent AF by overdrive pacing and to pace-terminate AF  at its onset have been shown to have a statistically significant positive impact on AF  burden. However, their impact is clinically small, often leads to symptoms such as  palpitations related to overdrive pacing, and should not be considered as a treatment  option in patients who do not have a bradycardia indication for pacing. In addition,  overdrive atrial pacing is not as efficacious as antiarrhythmic drug therapy or catheter  ablation for preventing AF. Some [ 33-36 ], but not all [ 24 ], of these algorithms appear  to more effectively reduce the total number of episodes of AF or the burden of  symptomatic AF compared to   DDDR alone [ 33-36 ]. We do not routinely use any of  these algorithms for overdrive atrial pacing.  The following studies are representative:  POT trial   – The Prevention Or Termination trial studied the effect of  antitachycardia pacing on AF burden when added to preventive pacing algorithms  (PPA) [ 37 ]. The study consisted of 85 patients who received a DDDR (rate-adaptive  dual-chamber pacemaker) with antitachycardia pacing (ATP) algorithms who had  greater than 30 minutes per week of AF. They were randomly assigned either to  PPA or to PPA with ATP for three months, and then they were crossed to the  alternative therapy for the same amount of time with a one-month washout  period. Both groups showed a significant decrease in AF burden at the end of the  first period (64 versus 81 percent), but there was no further decrease in AF burden  of the number of episodes when adding ATP to PPA.  •  SAFARI trial   – The Study of Atrial Fibrillation Reduction (SAFARI) was designed to  determine the impact of preventive pacing algorithms on patients with pacing  indications and a history of paroxysmal AF. The study randomized 240 patients to  receive either continuous overdrive and triggered overdrive pacing therapies  (PPTs) or standard pacing. The primary efficacy end point was post-randomization  AF burden, defined as the average number of hours per day spent in atrial  tachyarrhythmia during the longest period of at least 90 days between the 4- and  10-month visits. There was no difference in the development of permanent AF  between the PPTs ON group (0 percent) compared with the OFF group (2.5  percent). Patients randomized to the PPTs ON group had a median reduction in AF  burden to 0.08 hours/day compared with no change in the OFF group [ 38 ].  •  ADOPT-A trial   – The randomized Atrial Dynamic Overdrive Pacing Trial (ADOPT-A) • 04.07.2023 09.08 The role of pacemakers in the prevention of atrial fibrillation - UpToDate  Side 7 af 10 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/the-role-of-pacemakers-in-the-…h _ result&selectedTitle=23~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=22  PATIENTS WHO REQUIRE ICD OR RESYNCHRONIZATION THERAPY  trial assessed the efficacy of a pacemaker algorithm designed to pace the atrium  at rates slightly faster than intrinsic in patients with a history of symptomatic  paroxysmal or persistent AF and an indication for dual chamber pacing. The  primary end points of the study were symptomatic AF burden and adverse events.  A total of 319 patients were randomized. The burden of symptomatic atrial  arrhythmias (defined as AF, atrial flutter, and atrial tachyarrhythmias) was reduced  by 26.5 percent, from 2.6 percent in the control group to 1.9 percent in the  treatment group. The mean number of AF episodes (4.3 ± 11.5 control versus 3.2 ±  8.6 treatment) and adverse event rates were not statistically different between  groups.  ASSERT trial   – The main objective of the Asymptomatic Atrial Fibrillation and  Stroke Evaluation in Pacemaker Patients and the Atrial Fibrillation Reduction Atrial  Pacing Trial (ASSERT) was to evaluate the risk of stroke in patients with dual  chamber pacemakers and ICDs and subclinical AF episodes lasting >six minutes.  Patients with pacemakers were also randomly assigned to receive or not to receive  continuous atrial overdrive pacing to evaluate long-term atrial arrhythmia risk. Of  the 2451 pacemaker patients randomized, there was no difference in the annual  rate of atrial tachyarrhythmia development (1.96 percent per year in patients  randomized to receive atrial overdrive pacing versus 1.44 percent per year in  control patients) and no difference in the combined end point of stroke, systemic  embolism, myocardial infarction, death from vascular causes, or hospitalization for  heart failure [ 39 ].  •  MINERVA trial   – This trial evaluated a novel atrial antitachycardia pacing feature  (DDDRP). In the study, DDDRP alone was compared with DDDRP with managed  ventricular pacing (MVP) or with MVP alone in patients with bradycardia and  previous atrial arrhythmias [ 40 ]. The reactive antitachycardia pacing algorithm  used in the study continually monitors the atrial rhythm and delivers tiered pacing  therapies based on atrial rate. The primary AF objective was to assess rates of  permanent AF in the 1166 enrolled patients. At two years, permanent or persistent  AF occurred in 19 percent of patients in the control DDDRP arm, 25 percent in the  MVP arm, and 15.1 percent in the DDDRP + MVP arm [ 2 ].  • 04.07.2023 09.08 The role of pacemakers in the prevention of atrial fibrillation - UpToDate  Side 8 af 10 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/the-role-of-pacemakers-in-the-…h _ result&selectedTitle=23~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=22  The number of patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) who are receiving an implantable  cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) or who require cardiac resynchronization therapy is  increasing.  Many patients who have ICD indications (eg, low left ventricular ejection fraction) may have  a history of AF or may have subclinical AF detected on routine follow-up. In patients with a  history of non-permanent AF and both pacing and ICD indications, we place a dual-  chamber ICD. In patients with no known AF history in whom an ICD is indicated, we place a  single-chamber device. An atrial sensing only (VDD) ICD lead is also available and may be  useful in the diagnosis of AF in a patient with a single lead ICD. A stand-alone atrial  defibrillator was previously evaluated but is no longer available due to the high risk of  recurrent AF and the pain associated with shocks. These devices are capable of sensing  within and defibrillating the right atrium. However, we do not recommend their placement  to terminate AF nor do we use them for AF outside the hospital setting.  The use of cardiac resynchronization in patients with AF is discussed separately. (See  "Cardiac resynchronization therapy in atrial fibrillation", section on 'Our approach' .)  RECOMMENDATIONS OF OTHERS  We agree with recommendations made by the American College of Cardiology  Foundation/American Heart Association/Heart Rhythm Society guidelines and their  focused updates [ 2,41,42 ].  SOCIETY GUIDELINE LINKS  Links to society and government-sponsored guidelines from selected countries and  regions around the world are provided separately. (See   "Society guideline links: Atrial  fibrillation"   and   "Society guideline links: Arrhythmias in adults" .)  INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS  UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, “The Basics” and “Beyond   the  Basics.” The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5   to 6  grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have  th   th 04.07.2023 09.08 The role of pacemakers in the prevention of atrial fibrillation - UpToDate  Side 9 af 10 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/the-role-of-pacemakers-in-the-…h _ result&selectedTitle=23~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=22  about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview  and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces  are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10   to  12   grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are  comfortable with   some medical jargon.  Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to  print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles  on a variety of subjects by searching on “patient info” and the keyword(s) of interest.)  SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS  th  th  Basics topic (see   "Patient education: Pacemakers (The Basics)" ) ●  Beyond the Basics topic (see   "Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics)" ) ●  Patients without an indication for a pacemaker   – Patients with atrial fibrillation  (AF) should   not   receive a permanent pacemaker to prevent or reduce the frequency  of AF in the absence of another indication for pacing. (See   'Alternate strategies'  above.)  ●  Avoiding right ventricular (RV) apical pacing   – In patients without chronic AF who  require a pacemaker for bradycardia, we recommend dual-chamber or atrial pacing,  rather than ventricular pacing ( Grade 1A ). RV pacing can increase the risk of AF.  Conduction system pacing, particularly left bundle area pacing, may be superior to RV  apical pacing in those expected to require a high degree of ventricular pacing. (See  'Patients with symptomatic bradycardia'   above.)  ●  Similarly, in patients with intact atrioventricular (AV) conduction who receive a dual-  chamber device, we recommend the use of pacing modes/parameters that minimize  RV pacing ( Grade 1B ). (See   'Patients with symptomatic bradycardia'   above.)  Ineffective strategies   – We do not use alternative-site, dual-right atrial, or biatrial  pacing to prevent AF, as available evidence does not support the efficacy of these  approaches. (See   'Alternate strategies'   above.)  ●  No role for overdrive pacing to prevent AF   – We do not use overdrive pacing ● 04.07.2023 09.08 The role of pacemakers in the prevention of atrial fibrillation - UpToDate  Side 10 af 10 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/the-role-of-pacemakers-in-the-… _ result&selectedTitle=23~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=22  Use of UpToDate is subject to the   Terms of Use .  Topic 1044 Version 32.0    (antitachycardia pacing) to prevent AF in patients who do not have a bradycardia  indication for pacing, as available evidence does not support the efficacy of this  approach in all patients.  We consider using overdrive atrial pacing in patients with frequent, symptomatic  episodes of AF whose episodes have been difficult to manage with rate or rhythm  control. (See   'Overdrive (antitachycardia) atrial pacing'   above.)  Patients with implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) indications who also  have AF   – In patients with a history of non-permanent AF and both pacing and ICD  indications, we place a dual-chamber ICD. An atrial sensing only (VDD) ICD lead is also  available and may be useful in the diagnosis of AF in a patient with a single-lead ICD.  (See   'Patients who require ICD or resynchronization therapy'   above.)  ● 