04.07.2023 09.34 Treatment with digoxin: Initial dosing, monitoring, and dose modification - UpToDate  Side 1 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-with-digoxin-initial-d…rch _ result&selectedTitle=72~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=71  Official reprint from UpToDate  www.uptodate.com   © 2023 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.  Treatment with digoxin: Initial dosing, monitoring,  and dose modification  INTRODUCTION  Cardiac glycosides have important positive inotropic, neurohormonal, and  electrophysiologic actions, which are the basis for its use in two clinical situations: heart  failure due to systolic dysfunction, and in certain supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. The  ability of   digoxin   to reduce sympathetic activation has also been recognized. For maximal  early benefits in treating tachyarrhythmias, digoxin requires loading doses, which can be  administered intravenously or orally.  While two cardiac glycosides ( digoxin   and digitoxin) were previously used, digitoxin has not  been widely available since the 1980s. As digoxin is now the only cardiac glycoside  available in most countries, the method of initiating therapy with digoxin for patients with  atrial fibrillation is presented here. Recommendations regarding the use of digoxin in the  management of heart failure or arrhythmias are discussed separately. (See   "Control of  ventricular rate in patients with atrial fibrillation who do not have heart failure:  Pharmacologic therapy"   and   "Secondary pharmacologic therapy for heart failure with  reduced ejection fraction", section on 'Digoxin' .)  INITIATION OF THERAPY  ®  author :   Elsa-Grace Giardina, MD, MS, FACC, FACP, FAHA  section   editor :   Brian Olshansky, MD  deputy   editor :   Nisha Parikh, MD, MPH  All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our   peer review process   is complete.  Literature review current through:   Jun 2023.  This topic last updated:   Aug 16, 2022. 04.07.2023 09.34 Treatment with digoxin: Initial dosing, monitoring, and dose modification - UpToDate  Side 2 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-with-digoxin-initial-d…ch _ result&selectedTitle=72~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=71  The electrolyte and renal status of each patient should be ascertained prior to initiating  treatment and periodically thereafter. Hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia, for example, may  promote the development of digoxin-induced arrhythmias, while impaired renal function  may result in higher than anticipated serum drug levels. (See   'Dose adjustments'   below.)  The initiation of   digoxin   therapy has been divided into rapid and slow digitalization  followed by the maintenance digoxin dose, and the proposed regimens vary considerably.  The following principles should be viewed as a general guide to the use of digoxin for its  inotropic or electrophysiologic effects, which must be modified according to clinical  circumstances. Patients receiving digoxin for ventricular rate control in atrial fibrillation or  flutter will usually require more rapid loading than those treated with digoxin for heart  failure, in whom a loading dose is typically not required. The use of digoxin primarily for  heart failure is discussed separately. (See   "Secondary pharmacologic therapy for heart  failure with reduced ejection fraction", section on 'Digoxin' .)  Slow digoxin loading   —   Slow oral digitalization, generally preferred for most patients, can  be achieved by starting a maintenance dose of 0.125 to 0.25 mg daily. A steady state will be  achieved after five cycles of the drug half-life (T1/2ß), which is approximately 7 to 10 days in  the average subject.  Rapid digoxin loading   —   Rapid intravenous and oral digitalization can be used to control  the ventricular response in atrial fibrillation and flutter. However, other drugs may be more  effective and/or have a more rapid onset of action on the ventricular response in these  arrhythmias; therefore, rapid digitalization is rarely needed unless alternative drugs are  contraindicated or have not been effective. (See   "Control of ventricular rate in patients with  atrial fibrillation who do not have heart failure: Pharmacologic therapy"   and   "Control of  ventricular rate in atrial flutter", section on 'Rate control with drugs' .)  The total loading dose with   digoxin   varies from patient to patient but is usually between  0.75 to 1.5 mg with intravenous administration and 1 to 1.5 mg with oral administration.  (See   'Dose adjustment in kidney disease'   below and   'Patients with low body weight'   below.)  Intravenous loading   – For ventricular rate control in atrial fibrillation and flutter, the  most rapid means of digitalization is the intravenous route. An initial intravenous  dose of 0.25 to 0.5 mg of   digoxin   is given over several minutes, followed by 0.25 mg  every 6 hours for a total loading dose of 0.75 to 1.5 mg (10 to 12 mcg/kg lean body  weight) ( calculator 1   and   calculator 2 ). Intravenous digoxin begins to act in 15 to 30  ● 04.07.2023 09.34 Treatment with digoxin: Initial dosing, monitoring, and dose modification - UpToDate  Side 3 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-with-digoxin-initial-d…ch _ result&selectedTitle=72~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=71  Loading dose adjustments   —   Patients who are hypokalemic, hypomagnesemic,  hypercalcemic, hypoxic, or with hypothyroidism are more sensitive to the effects of  digoxin . If these issues persist at the time of digoxin loading, an initial loading dose in the  lower range (eg, 0.75 mg or less) should be considered.  Digoxin   distributes widely to skeletal muscle, cardiac, and other lean tissue and has a large  volume of distribution (ie, 4 to 7 L/kg) in normal subjects, which is decreased in patients  who are older, have low skeletal muscle mass, or severe renal impairment. Digoxin serum  concentrations relative to the administered loading dose may be proportionally increased  among persons with low muscle mass and/or renal impairment, and a reduced loading  dose should be considered.  Renal impairment   —   The   digoxin   loading dose should be reduced by approximately one-  third to one-half (or more) in the setting of severe chronic renal insufficiency [ 1-3 ]. For most  patients with chronic renal insufficiency not on dialysis, the reduced loading dose may be  supplemented after six hours if clinical response is inadequate, in absence of toxicity. For  patients with stage 5 chronic kidney disease (glomerular filtration rate [GFR] <15  mL/minute), or for those on hemodialysis, chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis, or  continuous renal replacement therapy, alternative agents (eg, beta blockers or  nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers) may be preferred for heart rate control;  however, if digoxin will be used, a reduced loading dose of 3 to 5 mcg/kg (0.25 to 0.375 mg)  is recommended, followed by a maintenance dose of 0.0625 mg every 48 hours. (See   'Dose  adjustment in kidney disease'   below.)  Lean body weight   —   In general, it is reasonable to select an initial loading dose in the  lower range (ie, 0.75 to 1 mg) for patients of low to average lean body weight (eg, 45 to 70  kg) and in the upper part of the dose range (ie, 1 to 1.5 mg) for patients of average to  above average lean body weight (eg, 71 to 90 kg) ( calculator 1   and   calculator 2 ).  Patients with low body weight   —   Patients with body weight of less than 45 kg should  receive 50 percent of the normal loading dose.  Patients who are obese   —   Compared with normal weight subjects, neither volume of  minutes with a peak effect in 1 to 5 hours.  Oral loading   – Rapid oral digitalization can be accomplished by giving 0.5 mg initially  followed by 0.25 mg every six hours for a total loading dose of 0.75 to 1.5 mg.  ● 04.07.2023 09.34 Treatment with digoxin: Initial dosing, monitoring, and dose modification - UpToDate  Side 4 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-with-digoxin-initial-d…ch _ result&selectedTitle=72~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=71  distribution nor clearance of   digoxin   are consistently altered by changes in body  composition associated with obesity [ 4-6 ]. Therefore, normal (non-weight based) loading  doses should be used. However, if a weight based dose is used, it should be based upon  estimated lean body weight ( calculator 1   and   calculator 2 ).  Maintenance digoxin dosing   —   For most patients, the maintenance dose of   digoxin   will  be between 0.125 mg and 0.25 mg daily. The daily maintenance dose will vary depending  on the indication for digoxin therapy, with patients receiving digoxin for heart failure often  requiring lower doses than those who are taking digoxin for ventricular rate control.  Additionally, the maintenance dose is affected by renal function, body weight, and the  presence or absence of other medications which are known to alter the metabolism of  digoxin [ 7 ]. (See   'Dose adjustments'   below.)  Dose adjustments   —   Bioavailability is between 70 and 80 percent for conventional   digoxin  tablets and between 75 and 85 percent for digoxin elixir, and the T1/2ß of digoxin ranges  from 33 to 50 hours when renal function is normal. Unlike certain other drugs (eg,  furosemide ), the bioavailability of the oral dose forms of digoxin does not appear to be  affected by heart failure. Dose adjustments of digoxin are necessary in patients with renal  dysfunction, patients with low body weight, and with the concomitant use of certain  medications. The effect of digoxin in patients with heart failure and the need for dose  adjustments in such patients are discussed separately. (See   "Secondary pharmacologic  therapy for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction", section on 'Digoxin' .)  Dose adjustment in kidney disease   —   Approximately 70 to 80 percent of   digoxin   is  eliminated unchanged in the urine, leading to prolongation of the half-life in patients with  renal insufficiency. Renal insufficiency also decreases the extravascular volume of  Ventricular rate control – For patients taking   digoxin   for ventricular rate control in the  setting of atrial arrhythmias, the typical maintenance dose is between 0.125 and 0.25  mg daily. In contrast to digoxin use for heart failure, there is no particular serum  digoxin level which is targeted, as the medication should be adjusted to maintain  optimal ventricular rate control. However, serum digoxin levels higher than 1 ng/mL  (1.3 nmol/L) should be avoided to reduce the risk of digoxin toxicity.  ●  Heart failure – The approach to maintenance   digoxin   dosing in patients with heart  failure is discussed separately. (See   "Secondary pharmacologic therapy for heart  failure with reduced ejection fraction", section on 'Digoxin' .)  ● 04.07.2023 09.34 Treatment with digoxin: Initial dosing, monitoring, and dose modification - UpToDate  Side 5 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-with-digoxin-initial-d…ch _ result&selectedTitle=72~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=71  distribution of digoxin, another effect that can elevate plasma drug levels. As a result,   both  the initial loading dose and the maintenance dose must be reduced in patients with  underlying kidney disease. In end-stage kidney disease, for example, the loading  dose should be one-half to two-thirds normal.  Patients requiring hemodialysis   —   For patients on intermittent hemodialysis (IHD),  chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD), and continuous renal replacement therapy  (CRRT), the dosing recommendation is 0.0625 mg every 48 hours, or approximately 10 to  25 percent of the usual dose for patients with normal renal function given every 48 hours  [ 8,9 ]. No supplemental dose for dialysis is required because renal replacement therapies  (eg, IHD, CAPD, CRRT) remove only insignificant amounts of   digoxin   from the body due to  digoxin's large volume of distribution. Serum digoxin concentrations should be monitored.  The same dose recommendation is used for stage 5 chronic kidney disease patients (GFR  <15 mL/minute) who are not currently receiving dialysis. (See   'Monitoring serum digoxin'  below.)  Dose adjustment with hepatic disease   —   Hepatic disease has little influence on   digoxin  metabolism or clearance; therefore, no dose adjustment is necessary.  Dose adjustment with concomitant medications   —   There are a number of important  drug interactions with   digoxin . Some examples are provided below; in addition, specific  interactions of digoxin with medications may be determined using the   Lexicomp drug  interactions   program included within UpToDate ( Lexicomp drug interactions ).  The adjustment of the   digoxin   loading dose is discussed above. (See   'Renal  impairment'   above.)  ●  The initial maintenance dose (for congestive heart failure) adjusted for ideal body  weight and renal function (except stage 5 chronic kidney disease or receiving renal  replacement therapy) is presented in the table (   table 1 ). (See   'Patients requiring  hemodialysis'   below and   "Secondary pharmacologic therapy for heart failure with  reduced ejection fraction", section on 'Digoxin' .)  ●  Inhibitors of P-glycoprotein efflux transporters (eg,   amiodarone ,   dronedarone ,  propafenone ,   quinidine , and   verapamil ) can increase serum   digoxin   levels. With  concurrent dronedarone administration, for example, the digoxin dose should be  reduced by one-half if digoxin cannot be discontinued [ 10-12 ] (see   "Clinical uses of  ● 04.07.2023 09.34 Treatment with digoxin: Initial dosing, monitoring, and dose modification - UpToDate  Side 6 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-with-digoxin-initial-d…ch _ result&selectedTitle=72~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=71  Digoxin in pregnancy   —   Digoxin   crosses the placenta and has been used for both fetal  and maternal cardiac indications without report of fetal harm or teratogenicity [ 17 ]. As  such, there is no contraindication for using digoxin during pregnancy or during lactation.  dronedarone", section on 'Metabolism and drug interactions' ). A list of medicines that  inhibit P-glycoprotein is provided separately (   table 2 ).  Inducers of P-glycoprotein (eg,   phenytoin ,   rifampin , etc), on the other hand, can  decrease serum   digoxin   levels. A list of medicines that induce P-glycoprotein is  provided separately (   table 2 ).  ●  Cholestyramine   and antacids can decrease the intestinal absorption of   digoxin   by 20  to 35 percent, necessitating an increase in the daily dose. To avoid these interactions,  digoxin should be dosed one hour before or two to three hours after the  administration of the antacids or cholestyramine.  ●  Bupropion , an antidepressant that is also frequently prescribed to aid in smoking  cessation, can decrease   digoxin   levels by 60 percent; monitor serum digoxin levels  and clinical status [ 13-15 ].  ●  Diuretics may increase digitalis toxicity as a result of a decrease in the glomerular  filtration rate and the development of electrolyte abnormalities, especially  hypokalemia.  ●  Tetracycline   and   erythromycin   can interfere with the sequential hydrolysis pathway of  digoxin   metabolism (which begins in the stomach and is responsible for less than 15  percent of the metabolism in most patients but which can be significantly more active  in a minority of patients). As such, these drugs increase digoxin levels in  approximately 10 percent of patients in whom this pathway is a significant  component of the drug's metabolism.  ●  High doses of   biotin   (vitamin B7) can increase the measured serum concentration of  digoxin   by as much as 0.25 ng/mL (0.3 nmol/L) when measured using the luminescent  oxygen channeling   immunoassay (LOCI) [ 16 ]. This does not represent a true increase  in serum digoxin concentration but an interaction between biotin and the  measurement assay, resulting in the artificial appearance of increased serum digoxin  levels.  ● 04.07.2023 09.34 Treatment with digoxin: Initial dosing, monitoring, and dose modification - UpToDate  Side 7 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-with-digoxin-initial-d…ch _ result&selectedTitle=72~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=71  Digoxin in patients with amyloidosis   —   The inotropic effects of   digoxin   are not  generally beneficial in patients with amyloidosis. Moreover, because digoxin binds avidly to  amyloid fibrils, patients with amyloidosis who take digoxin may be at an increased risk of  digoxin toxicity [ 18 ]. Additionally, as a result of the binding of digoxin to myocardial  amyloid fibrils, cardiac digoxin concentration may be higher than serum digoxin  concentration, leading to toxicity in the setting of "therapeutic" serum digoxin levels.  However, in a patient with atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response, careful  digoxin administration is usually safe and effective for reducing the ventricular rate [ 19 ].  (See   "Amyloid cardiomyopathy: Treatment and prognosis" .)  MONITORING SERUM DIGOXIN  Monitoring   —   Given the relatively narrow therapeutic window of   digoxin , with substantial  overlap between so-called therapeutic and toxic levels, patients taking digoxin require  monitoring of the serum digoxin concentration, with the "optimal" level varying with the  clinical setting. Monitoring the serum digoxin level is particularly important in persons with  chronic renal dysfunction or rapidly changing renal function, as significantly decreased  renal function can lead to accumulation of digoxin and its metabolites and predispose to  digoxin toxicity. Additionally, patients with electrolyte disturbances, particularly  hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia, which may be related to diuretic therapy or other  medications, are at increased risk for digoxin-associated arrhythmias and should undergo  monitoring of the serum digoxin level until serum potassium level and magnesium  concentration return to the normal range [ 20 ]. (See   'Dose adjustments'   above and   "Cardiac  arrhythmias due to digoxin toxicity", section on 'Plasma digoxin levels associated with  toxicity' .)  Monitoring the serum   digoxin   concentration is most important when digoxin is used in the  treatment of heart failure with systolic dysfunction, whereas levels are only checked when  used in patients with atrial fibrillation if toxicity is suspected. Blood samples should be  obtained at least 6 hours, but optimally 12 hours, after administration of digoxin to ensure  completion of distribution from the blood to the tissues. In patients with advanced kidney  disease or who are on hemodialysis, the digoxin level should be checked at least 12 to 24  hours after the prior dose. Serum digoxin concentrations measured prior to these times  may be falsely elevated.  Adjusting the digoxin dose   —   Assuming that the   digoxin   level was drawn at the correct 04.07.2023 09.34 Treatment with digoxin: Initial dosing, monitoring, and dose modification - UpToDate  Side 8 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-with-digoxin-initial-d…ch _ result&selectedTitle=72~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=71  time, at steady state, and under conditions of stable renal function, there is a linear  relationship between digoxin dose and serum concentration. As an example, a steady state  concentration is measured and returns at 1.6 ng/mL (2.05 nmol/L) in a patient taking a  daily maintenance dose (for this example, 0.25 mg daily). Assuming the desired serum  concentration is 0.8 ng/mL (1.0 nmol/L), the dose should be reduced by 50 percent (to  0.125 mg daily in this example). The same linear relationship is true for patients whose  serum concentration is lower than desired in whom a dose increase is needed.  Heart failure   —   The monitoring of serum   digoxin   levels in patients with heart failure is  discussed separately. (See   "Secondary pharmacologic therapy for heart failure with  reduced ejection fraction", section on 'Digoxin' .)  Atrial fibrillation   —   Digoxin   is generally less effective for rate control of atrial fibrillation  (AF) than beta blockers or calcium channel blockers, is less likely to control the ventricular  rate during exercise (when vagal tone is low and sympathetic tone is high), has little or no  ability to terminate the arrhythmia, and often does not slow the heart rate with recurrent  AF. Thus, patients frequently require the addition of a beta blocker or calcium channel  blocker for optimal rate control. (See   "Control of ventricular rate in patients with atrial  fibrillation who do not have heart failure: Pharmacologic therapy" .)  When   digoxin   is used strictly for ventricular rate control in AF, serum digoxin levels should  be monitored periodically, although the drug concentration often does not correlate with  ventricular rate control and is used more as a guide to toxicity than to therapy. Junctional  escape beats (as detected by the equality of all the longest observed R-R intervals on the  electrocardiogram) are common when digitalis has successfully slowed the ventricular rate.  Giving more digoxin in this setting will increase the degree of AV nodal block and produce  periods of regular junctional rhythm. The change from single junctional escapes to periodic  junctional rhythm usually signifies the development of digoxin toxicity. (See   "Cardiac  arrhythmias due to digoxin toxicity", section on 'Junctional rhythm, tachycardia, and  bradycardia' .)  Relation to digoxin toxicity   —   Digoxin-related cardiac arrhythmias and extracardiac  symptoms can occur when the serum   digoxin   concentration is in the therapeutic or even  subtherapeutic range; as a result, the presence of digoxin toxicity or excess is often a  clinical diagnosis   irrespective of circulating levels (unless of course the value is zero). (See  "Cardiac arrhythmias due to digoxin toxicity" .) 04.07.2023 09.34 Treatment with digoxin: Initial dosing, monitoring, and dose modification - UpToDate  Side 9 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-with-digoxin-initial-d…ch _ result&selectedTitle=72~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=71  SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS  Indications   – Cardiac glycosides such as   digoxin   have positive inotropic,  neurohormonal, and electrophysiologic actions which are the basis for its use in two  clinical situations: heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, and in certain  supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, primarily atrial fibrillation (AF) and atrial flutter.  (See   'Introduction'   above.)  ●  Slow   digoxin   loading   – This approach is preferred for most patients. A slow digoxin  load is achieved by starting a maintenance oral dose of 0.125 to 0.25 mg daily, which  results in a steady state serum level of drug in approximately 7 to 10 days in the  average subject. (See   'Slow digoxin loading'   above.)  ●  Rapid   digoxin   loading   – This approach can be used to control the ventricular  response in AF and atrial flutter (see   'Rapid digoxin loading'   above):  ●  Initial intravenous doses of 0.25 to 0.5 mg of   digoxin   are given over several  minutes, followed by 0.25 mg every six hours for a total dose of 0.75 to 1.5 mg  with appropriate dosing adjustments for kidney disease and the concomitant use  of certain medications. (See   'Dose adjustment in kidney disease'   above and   'Dose  adjustment with concomitant medications'   above.)  •  Rapid oral   digoxin   loading can be accomplished by giving 0.5 mg initially followed  by 0.25 mg every six hours for a total loading dose of 0.75 to 1.5 mg.  •  Monitoring considerations ●  Narrow therapeutic window   – Given the relatively narrow therapeutic window of  digoxin   and substantial overlap between therapeutic and toxic levels, patients  taking digoxin require monitoring of the serum digoxin concentration. The  optimal level of digoxin varies according to clinical setting. Monitoring the serum  digoxin level is particularly important in persons with chronic kidney disease,  rapidly changing kidney function, or electrolyte disturbances (eg, hypokalemia,  hypomagnesemia). (See   'Monitoring serum digoxin'   above.)  •  Dose adjustments   – Assuming that the   digoxin   level was drawn at the correct  time, at steady state, and under conditions of stable kidney function, there is a  linear relationship between digoxin dose and serum concentration that should be  • 04.07.2023 09.34 Treatment with digoxin: Initial dosing, monitoring, and dose modification - UpToDate  Side 10 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-with-digoxin-initial-…ch _ result&selectedTitle=72~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=71  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  The UpToDate editorial staff acknowledges Lynne Sylvia, PharmD, who contributed to  earlier versions of this topic review.  Use of UpToDate is subject to the   Terms of Use .  followed for any necessary dose adjustments. (See   'Adjusting the digoxin dose'  above.)  When   digoxin   is used strictly for ventricular rate control in AF, serum digoxin levels  should be monitored periodically, although the drug concentration often does not  correlate with ventricular rate control and is used more as a guide to toxicity than  to therapy. (See   'Atrial fibrillation'   above.)  Patients with kidney disease   – Approximately 70 to 80 percent of   digoxin   is  eliminated in the urine; thus, the half-life of digoxin is prolonged in patients with  kidney disease. Kidney disease also decreases the extravascular volume of  distribution of digoxin, another effect that can elevate plasma drug levels. As a  result, we reduce both the initial loading dose and the maintenance dose in  patients with kidney disease (   table 1 ). (See   'Dose adjustment in kidney disease'  above.)  •  Patients with concomitant medications   –   Quinidine ,   verapamil , and   amiodarone  (medications that inhibit P-glycoprotein efflux transporters) can increase serum  digoxin   levels, thereby requiring a reduction in the daily digoxin dose (   table 2 ).  Inducers of P-glycoprotein (eg,   phenytoin ,   rifampin , etc), on the other hand, can  decrease serum digoxin levels.  •  Cholestyramine   and antacids can decrease the intestinal absorption of   digoxin .  This necessitates spacing of the doses or an increase in the daily digoxin dose.  Specific interactions of   digoxin   with other medications may be determined using  the   Lexicomp drug interactions   program ( Lexicomp drug interactions ) included  within UpToDate. (See   'Dose adjustment with concomitant medications'   above.) 04.07.2023 09.34 Treatment with digoxin: Initial dosing, monitoring, and dose modification - UpToDate  Side 11 af 11 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-with-digoxin-initial-d…ch _ result&selectedTitle=72~150&usage _ type=default&display _ rank=71  Topic 1051 Version 50.0   