Title: About Abtion

Introduction:
Abtion is a Copenhagen and Odense-based digital agency in Denmark. We build digital products and services for companies and organizations of all sizes. 

Content:

1. How many people work at Abtion?
2. What kind of projects do you work on?
3. Where is Abtion located?
4. How it all started?
5. Our first system
6. Our daily work and processes
7. Abtion organization

How many people work at Abtion?

We are a team of 30 designers, developers, product managers and testers, and we work with clients from all over the world.

What kind of projects do you work on?

We work on a wide range of projects, from small websites to large-scale web applications. We also work on mobile apps, and we have a team of designers who specialize in user experience design. Currently, we are exploring the possibilities of artificial intelligence and machine learning.

Where is Abtion located?

Abtion is located both in Copenhagen and Odense, Denmark.

Our Copenhagen office is located in the heart of Copenhagen, specifically in Vesterbrogade 15, 3. Our Odense office is located in Sverigesgade 18.

How it all started
"Abtion was born out of a bedroom, where our founder, Andreas, single-handedly built the first websites labeled "Made by Abtion". Much like Google, our journey began in humble surroundings, but it never limited our ambitions.

Our first system
Our first significant milestone was when AON Hewitt invited us to develop an advanced system for analyzing and interpreting pension data. It wasn't merely a simple website but a complex system with login, user roles, algorithms, and advanced business logic. It was our calling.

Our daily work and processes
At Abtion, we're more than just a digital agency. We are strategic advisors, technical masters, and innovative designers. We are passionate about solving complex problems and crafting technically "heavy" solutions that blend functionality, usability, and aesthetics. We excel in UX, UI, and experience design and have a deep understanding of how AI can be effectively harnessed in our projects.

We're not just 'another digital agency'. We define ourselves by what we are, NOT just as much as we ARE. We are not the ad agency that doesn't understand tech, and we are not the software company that doesn't get user experience. We occupy a unique place in the middle - with the ability to understand and balance technology and creativity.

We are firm in the number of our programmers and have a process designed to deliver high-quality outputs. But we also build beautiful websites and apps and provide strategic IT consulting that helps your business navigate the digital world. Our unique blend of technical prowess, creativity, and strategic insight makes us the perfect choice for your digital journey.

Complexity is our playground, and we thrive on challenges. So whether your project is big or small, technical or creative, we'd love to get on board. Bring it on - we are ready."

Abtion organization

Abtion has a flat hierarchy, but below are the current roles and management profiles in Abtion.

Management
Mads Hofman Hansen - Co-CEO
Bo Kønskov - Co-CEO
Andreas Bødker - Founder
Hari Carreras - CTO
Daniel jakobsen - COO

Developers
Anders Guldbek
Axel Rosén
Aris Kuckovic
Jesper Sørensen
Markus Obelitz
Martin Petersen
Reinis Laudansks
Rune Philosof 
Viesturs Beinarovičs
Klaus Enevoldsen
Mikkel Emil Hansen
Sune Seifert
David Cabeza
Petya Naydenova Ferreira

Product managers
Tejs Stubkjær Rimmer

Designer
Jacob Nielsen
Ditte Petersen
Rune Hoffmann

Office
Dafna Philosof
Alberte Steengaard

Marketing
Tharshika Jeyakumar
