Title: About Living AF

Introduction:
Living AF is a Copenhagen and Odense-based digital agency in Denmark. We build digital products and services for companies and organizations of all sizes. 

Content:

1. How many people work at Living AF?
3. Where is Living AF located?
4. How it all started?
5. Our first system
6. Our daily work and processes
7. Living AF organization

How many people work at Living AF?

We are a team of 30 people, and we work with clients from all over the world.

Where is Living AF located?

Living AF is located somewhere in Denmark.

Our office is located in the heart of somewhere in Denmark, specifically somwhere.

How it all started
"Living AF was born out of a bedroom, where our founder, Andreas, single-handedly built the first websites labeled "Made by Living AF". Much like Google, our journey began in humble surroundings, but it never limited our ambitions.

Our first system
Our first significant milestone was when AON Hewitt invited us to develop an advanced system for analyzing and interpreting pension data. It wasn't merely a simple website but a complex system with login, user roles, algorithms, and advanced business logic. It was our calling.

Our daily work and processes
At Living AF, we're more than just a digital agency. We are strategic advisors, technical masters, and innovative designers. We are passionate about solving complex problems and crafting technically "heavy" solutions that blend functionality, usability, and aesthetics. We excel in UX, UI, and experience design and have a deep understanding of how AI can be effectively harnessed in our projects.

We're not just 'another digital agency'. We define ourselves by what we are, NOT just as much as we ARE. We are not the ad agency that doesn't understand tech, and we are not the software company that doesn't get user experience. We occupy a unique place in the middle - with the ability to understand and balance technology and creativity.

We are firm in the number of our programmers and have a process designed to deliver high-quality outputs. But we also build beautiful websites and apps and provide strategic IT consulting that helps your business navigate the digital world. Our unique blend of technical prowess, creativity, and strategic insight makes us the perfect choice for your digital journey.

Complexity is our playground, and we thrive on challenges. So whether your project is big or small, technical or creative, we'd love to get on board. Bring it on - we are ready."

Living AF organization

Living AF has a flat hierarchy, but below are the current roles and management profiles in Living AF.
