04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 1 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cardioversion-beyond-the-basics…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Official reprint from UpToDate  www.uptodate.com   © 2023 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.  Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics)  Please read the   Disclaimer   at the end of this page.  CARDIOVERSION OVERVIEW  An electrical cardioversion, often referred to simply as a cardioversion, is a procedure used  to treat an abnormal and rapid heart rhythm (also called a cardiac arrhythmia). The most  commonly treated arrhythmia is atrial fibrillation. Another rhythm commonly treated with  electrical cardioversion is atrial flutter. During a cardioversion procedure, an electrical  "shock" is delivered to the chest to restore the heart rhythm to a normal pattern.  The following is a discussion of cardioversion and the situations in which it is used.  THE HEART'S CONDUCTION SYSTEM  To understand how electricity can be used to allow the heart to beat normally, it is helpful  to first understand the heart's electrical system. The heart is made up mostly of muscle  tissue. This muscle forms the walls of the four heart chambers. The upper chambers are  called atria, with one on the right side and one on the left side of the heart. The two lower  chambers are the right and left ventricles (   figure 1 ). There is a heart valve after each  chamber to help keep the blood moving in the right direction.  Electrical impulses cause the heart muscle to contract. During a normal heart rhythm, each  ®  author :   Bradley P Knight, MD, FACC  section   editor :   Richard L Page, MD  deputy   editor :   Nisha Parikh, MD, MPH  All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our   peer review process   is complete.  Literature review current through:   Jun 2023.  This topic last updated:   Jun 13, 2022. 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 2 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cardioversion-beyond-the-basics…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  impulse moves in a standardized and orderly manner over nerves from the atria to the  ventricles, with each impulse resulting in one heartbeat (   figure 2 ).  Under normal conditions, the electrical impulses are generated from an area of specialized  pacemaker cells called the sinus node, located in the right atrium (the upper right chamber  of the heart).  After leaving the sinus node, the impulse travels through and activates both atria. The  impulse then travels through specialized heart fibers that transmit the impulse rapidly to  various parts of the right and left ventricles; this causes the heart to contract. Each  individual muscle cell of the ventricles is activated. If this pattern of conduction and  activation is altered in any way, an abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia) may occur.  TYPES OF ARRHYTHMIAS  During a rapid cardiac arrhythmia, an abnormal fast electrical mechanism overrides the  action of the sinus node. There are a wide variety of cardiac arrhythmias, some of which  start in the atria and some in the ventricles.  In a normal heart rhythm, the electrical impulse moves from the top to the bottom of the  heart, then dissipates. The next impulse begins independently in the sinus node  (   figure 2 ). Sometimes, cardiac tissue can form an electrical loop or short-circuit. If an  electrical impulse enters this loop at the right time under the right conditions, it will cycle  through the loop over and over again, repeating itself indefinitely. This is called a re-  entrant loop. Each time the impulse cycles through the re-entrant circuit, it activates the  heart, causing another contraction.  Arrhythmias that are generated by a re-entrant circuit are often regular and organized and  can be treated with cardioversion. Examples of a single reentrant circuit include atrial  flutter and ventricular tachycardia (VT). Under some circumstances, multiple reentrant  circuits can develop, resulting in very rapid and chaotic arrhythmias, including atrial  fibrillation.  How cardioversion works   —   Cardioversion involves the delivery of a high-energy shock  through the chest wall to the heart muscle. This high-energy impulse activates all of the  cardiac muscle and conduction tissue simultaneously. Reentrant circuits are interrupted,  breaking the repeating cycle and stopping the arrhythmia. When the reentrant circuit is 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 3 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cardioversion-beyond-the-basics…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  broken and the arrhythmia stops, the sinus node begins to fire again and a normal heart  rhythm is restored.  CARDIOVERSION PROCEDURE  A cardioversion procedure is performed in a closely monitored hospital-based setting, such  as an intensive care unit, an emergency department, or a specially equipped procedure  room. The patient's heart rate and rhythm, blood pressure, breathing rate, and oxygen  levels are monitored. The cardioversion procedure is usually performed electively in stable  patients, but it is sometimes performed emergently in patients who are unstable.  Because the shock would be painful for a patient who is awake, an intravenous medication  is given to sedate the patient. Patients are asleep during the cardioversion and most do  not remember the procedure. It is not usually necessary to have a breathing tube  (endotracheal tube) placed before the procedure.  Two electrode patches or paddles are applied to the skin after the skin is shaved. One  patch is applied near the right upper chest, and the second is placed either on the lower  left chest or the back, under the left shoulder blade. When the patient is sedated, a burst of  electrical current is sent through these patches or paddles. Most of the electrical impulse is  absorbed by the chest, but some makes it to the heart. The amount of energy used  depends upon the arrhythmia. If the first attempt is unsuccessful at converting the heart  rhythm to normal, subsequent higher energy shocks may be needed.  Once the setup and sedation are complete, the cardioversion itself takes only a few  seconds. The patient usually awakens 5 to 10 minutes after the cardioversion when the  anesthetic drug administered for sedation wears off.  Cardioversion in patients with implanted devices   —   Some patients who require a  cardioversion procedure already have a pacemaker or implantable cardioverter-  defibrillator (ICD). An ICD is a device that is surgically placed under the skin in the chest  and constantly monitors the heart's rhythm. It delivers a cardioverting or defibrillating  shock if a life-threatening arrhythmia develops. This device is discussed in detail in a  separate topic. (See   "Patient education: Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (Beyond the  Basics)" .)  Several precautions are necessary when attempting external cardioversion in a patient with 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 4 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cardioversion-beyond-the-basics…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  a permanent implanted device. Cardioversion can change the settings of the ICD or  pacemaker, or may damage the ICD or pacemaker, the leads, or the heart's tissue. To  reduce these risks, the patches or paddles are placed at least 12 cm from the pacemaker or  ICD and usually in a front-to-back position. After cardioversion, the pacemaker or ICD is  usually evaluated to ensure that it still functions normally.  When a patient with an ICD undergoes cardioversion, the shock can be delivered using the  ICD rather than in the standard fashion. The advantage of using the ICD is that it avoids  the risk of a skin irritation from an external shock and the small chance of damage to the  ICD system from the shock. The disadvantage of using the ICD is that it consumes some of  the battery in the device and does not always work for cardioversion of atrial arrhythmias.  Postprocedure care   —   After being monitored for several hours, most patients are able to  go home, although a family member or friend should drive due to the residual effects of  anesthesia. Patients who receive sedation cannot drive for at least 24 hours. Some patients  have irritation of the skin in the area where the shock was delivered; skin cream such as  Aquaphor or Eucerin may be applied to reduce the irritation.  CARDIOVERSION FOR SPECIFIC ARRHYTHMIAS  As mentioned above, cardioversion is useful for terminating arrhythmias that arise from a  reentry circuit. Cardioversion is tailored for each type of arrhythmia.  Atrial fibrillation   —   Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a common arrhythmia that may be treated  with cardioversion. The success rate of cardioversion with atrial fibrillation is generally  better than 90 percent. Chances of success are lower when the atrial fibrillation has been  present for more than several months or when the left atrium is very enlarged.  In general, there are two ways that a cardioversion procedure for AF can fail. In some  cases, the energy required to restore the heart to a normal rhythm is higher than the  maximum energy that can be delivered by the cardioversion equipment. When this occurs,  newer generation equipment that can deliver a more effective type of energy waveform,  known as a biphasic waveform, can be used if it was not used initially. Almost all hospitals  now have defibrillators that deliver biphasic waveforms. Other potential solutions include  applying pressure to the paddles during the shock, and administration of an intravenous  medication called   ibutilide . Ibutilide lowers the energy required to restore the heart to a 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 5 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cardioversion-beyond-the-basics…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  normal rhythm and is highly effective in patients who can safely receive the medication.  When this drug is given, patients must be monitored for at least four hours before going  home.  A second way that a cardioversion procedure for AF can fail is when the AF recurs  immediately after a normal rhythm has been restored. In some patients, administration of  ibutilide   and repeating the cardioversion is effective in restoring sinus rhythm.  Blood clots can form within the atria during AF since blood flow is slowed. A stroke can  occur after cardioversion if there is a blood clot in the atrium when the cardioversion is  performed (or if a clot forms soon after the cardioversion) and it travels through the blood  stream to the brain. Most patients are given a blood thinner (an anticoagulant such as  warfarin ,   apixaban , or   rivaroxaban ) for at least three to four weeks before and after  cardioversion to prevent a stroke unless the AF has been present for less than a day or two.  Many patients will be required to take blood thinners indefinitely after cardioversion. (See  "Patient education: Atrial fibrillation (Beyond the Basics)" .)  For patients who need to undergo elective cardioversion before they are able to take an  anticoagulant effectively for three to four weeks beforehand, a transesophageal  echocardiogram (TEE) is often performed before the cardioversion to be sure that there is  no clot already formed in the heart. A TEE is done by putting an ultrasound probe down the  throat and into the esophagus while the patient is under sedation. The probe uses sound  waves to create images of the heart. (See   "Transesophageal echocardiography: Indications,  complications, and normal views" .)  AF can recur within the first few hours after cardioversion in some patients. For a  scheduled elective cardioversion, some patients are given an antiarrhythmic drug starting  days before the cardioversion to improve the chances of maintaining a normal rhythm  following cardioversion. Treatment before the cardioversion will allow time for the  medication to get into the bloodstream, which may prevent a recurrence of AF. In addition,  a normal rhythm may be restored with the medication alone in some patients, making  electrical cardioversion unnecessary. Pretreatment with an antiarrhythmic drug may also  improve the chances of a successful cardioversion and reduce the energy required for the  procedure.  Atrial flutter   —   Atrial flutter is an atrial arrhythmia that can be treated with cardioversion.  The success rate is over 90 percent. Success is not related to the duration of this 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 6 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cardioversion-beyond-the-basics…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  arrhythmia. Anticoagulation is also given prior to and after cardioversion, as it is in patients  with AF.  Cardioversion during pregnancy   —   Cardioversion can be performed during pregnancy  without affecting the rhythm of the fetus. It is recommended, however, that the fetal  rhythm be monitored during the procedure.  CARDIOVERSION COMPLICATIONS  There are several complications that can occur with cardioversion:  An important risk of the cardioversion procedure is the sedation itself. Moderate or  deep sedation, which is used to allow the cardioversion procedure to be done without  the patient feeling pain, can result in aspiration of stomach contents causing  pneumonia, or obstruction of breathing. The risk of problems associated with  sedation is higher in patients who are obese, have sleep apnea, or have an abnormal  airway. In many facilities sedation for scheduled cardioversions is administered by an  anesthesiologist, either routinely or in high-risk patients.  ●  Cardioversion can sometimes provoke other fast or slow arrhythmias. The shock is  timed with the heartbeat to avoid provoking a dangerous arrhythmia. In an  occasional patient, the sinus node may not work properly after cardioversion and a  very slow heart rate may result. A temporary pacemaker may be necessary to correct  this problem.  ●  Cardioversion can result in a stroke. A stroke can occur when the shock either causes  a clot that is already present to travel to the brain or elsewhere throughout the body,  or results in formation of a new clot after the cardioversion; this is less likely in  patients who have had an arrhythmia for less than 24 to 48 hours. Use of a blood  thinner (anticoagulant) before cardioversion greatly reduces this risk. (See   'Atrial  fibrillation'   above.)  ●  Some heart tissue may be damaged as a result of high-energy shocks or repeated  shocks. Significant damage is uncommon, and there are generally no short- or long-  term complications.  ●  The skin may be burned and/or painful as a result of the shocks. Taking a medication, ● 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 7 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cardioversion-beyond-the-basics…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  WHERE TO GET MORE INFORMATION  Your health care provider is the best source of information for questions and concerns  related to your medical problem.  This article will be updated as needed on our website (   www.uptodate.com/patients ).  Related topics for patients, as well as selected articles written for health care professionals,  are also available. Some of the most relevant are listed below.  Patient level information   —   UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials.  The Basics   —   The Basics patient education pieces answer the four or five key questions a  patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a  general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials.  Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (The Basics)  Patient education: Heart failure and atrial fibrillation (The Basics)  Patient education: Atrial fibrillation (The Basics)  Patient education: Ventricular tachycardia (The Basics)  Patient education: Atrial flutter (The Basics)  Patient education: Long QT syndrome (The Basics)  Beyond the Basics   —   Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more  sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are best for patients who want in-depth  information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.  Patient education: Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Atrial fibrillation (Beyond the Basics)  Professional level information   —   Professional level articles are designed to keep doctors  and other health professionals up-to-date on the latest medical findings. These articles are  thorough, long, and complex, and they contain multiple references to the research on  which they are based. Professional level articles are best for people who are comfortable  with a lot of medical terminology and who want to read the same materials their doctors  such as   ibuprofen , can reduce the severity of this pain. 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 8 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cardioversion-beyond-the-basics…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  are reading.  Basic principles and technique of external electrical cardioversion and defibrillation  Cardioversion for specific arrhythmias  Atrial fibrillation: Cardioversion  The following organizations also provide reliable health information.  [ 1-4 ]  Use of UpToDate is subject to the   Terms of Use .  This generalized information is a limited summary of diagnosis, treatment, and/or  medication information. It is not meant to be comprehensive and should be used as a  tool to help the user understand and/or assess potential diagnostic and treatment  options. It does NOT include all information about conditions, treatments, medications,  side effects, or risks that may apply to a specific patient. It is not intended to be medical  advice or a substitute for the medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment of a health care  provider based on the health care provider's examination and assessment of a patient's  specific and unique circumstances. Patients must speak with a health care provider for  complete information about their health, medical questions, and treatment options,  including any risks or benefits regarding use of medications. This information does not  endorse any treatments or medications as safe, effective, or approved for treating a  specific patient. UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates disclaim any warranty or liability relating  to this information or the use thereof. The use of this information is governed by the  National Library of Medicine ●  (   www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/007110.htm , available in Spanish)  National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute ●  (   www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/dci/Diseases/crv/crv_whatis.html )  Heart Rhythm Society ●  (   http://www.hrsonline.org/Patient-  Resources/Treatment/Cardioversion#axzz2QAR9BBOa ) 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 9 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cardioversion-beyond-the-basics…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Terms of Use, available at   https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en/know/clinical-  effectiveness-terms   ©2023 UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates and/or licensors. All rights  reserved.  Topic 3435 Version 30.0 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 10 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cardioversion-beyond-the-basic…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  GRAPHICS  Anatomy of the interior of the heart  Graphic 77576 Version 4.0 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 11 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cardioversion-beyond-the-basics…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  The conduction system of the heart  The heart has its own built-in electrical system, called the conduction system.  The conduction system sends electrical signals throughout the heart that  determine the timing of the heartbeat and cause the heart to beat in a  coordinated, rhythmic pattern. The electrical signals, or impulses, of the heart  are generated by a clump of specialized tissue called the sinus node. Each time  the sinus node generates a new electrical impulse, that impulse spreads out  through the heart's upper chambers, called the right atrium and the left  atrium. This electrical impulse, as it spreads across the two atria, stimulates  them to contract, pumping blood into the right and left ventricles. The  electrical impulse then spreads to the atrioventricular (AV) node, which is  another clump of specialized tissue located between the atria and the  ventricles. The AV node momentarily slows down the spread of the electrical  impulse, to allow the left and right atria to finish contracting. From the AV  node, the impulse spreads into a system of specialized fibers called the His  bundle and the right and left bundle branches. These fibers distribute the  electrical impulse rapidly to all areas of the right and left ventricles, stimulating  them to contract in a coordinated way. With this contraction, blood is pumped  from the right ventricle to the lungs, and from the left ventricle throughout the  body.  Graphic 71235 Version 3.0 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 12 af 12 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cardioversion-beyond-the-basic…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link   