04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 1 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Official reprint from UpToDate  www.uptodate.com   © 2023 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.  Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the  Basics)  Please read the   Disclaimer   at the end of this page.  MITRAL REGURGITATION OVERVIEW  Mitral regurgitation (MR), which is also known as mitral insufficiency, is a common heart  valve disorder. When MR is present, blood leaks backwards through the mitral valve when  the heart contracts. This reduces the amount of blood that is pumped out to the body.  This topic review discusses the causes, signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment  options for people with mitral regurgitation.  HEART FUNCTION  Normal heart   —   The heart is a pump that contains four chambers: the right atrium, right  ventricle, left atrium, and left ventricle (   figure 1 ). Blood returning to the heart flows into  the right atrium, and then the right ventricle. Blood is pumped out of the right ventricle  into the lungs, where oxygen is added. Blood then returns to the left heart chambers  through the left atrium; it then flows into the left ventricle, which pumps the blood to the  rest of the body through the aorta.  ®  author :   Sorin Pislaru, MD, PhD  section   editor :   Catherine M Otto, MD  deputy   editor :   Susan B Yeon, MD, JD, FACC  All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our   peer review process   is complete.  Literature review current through:   Jun 2023.  This topic last updated:   Mar 03, 2020. 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 2 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  The heart normally contracts and relaxes in a rhythmic fashion. This action causes changes  in pressure within the heart that allow the heart to fill with blood (during relaxation) and to  pump blood forward to the body (during contraction).  There are four valves in the heart:  These valves consist of flaps called leaflets or cusps that open and close to help ensure the  continued pulsatile forward flow of blood through the heart.  Mitral regurgitation   —   With mitral regurgitation (MR), blood leaks backwards through the  mitral valve and into the left atrium when the heart contracts. This means that less blood is  pumped out of the heart to the body. If the amount of MR is small and does not progress,  the backward leak has no significant consequences.  If significant (moderate to severe) MR is present, the left ventricle must work harder to  keep up with the body's demands for oxygenated blood. Over time, the heart muscle (the  myocardium) and circulatory system undergo a series of changes to maintain this  increased demand. These changes generally occur in phases over many years, even  decades, depending upon the amount of blood that is leaking backward and how the heart  responds to MR. The cause of MR also influences how soon the heart begins to fail.  Compensated phase   —   The major change during this phase is enlargement of the left  ventricle. This is known as the compensated phase, which does not usually cause  symptoms, the heart rhythm is usually normal, and if the leak is not severe, surgical  treatment is generally not required.  Transitional phase   —   As MR progresses, the heart muscle (myocardium) begins to  weaken, and the ventricle can no longer compensate for the regurgitation. This phase is  called the transitional phase. The reason that you might progress from the compensated to  Two valves separate the upper chambers (the atria) and the lower chambers (the  ventricles) (   figure 1 ). On the right, the tricuspid valve separates the right atrium  from the right ventricle. On the left, the mitral valve separates the left atrium from  the left ventricle.  ●  Two valves separate the heart from the major blood vessels: One is between the right  ventricle and the lungs (pulmonic valve), and other is between the left ventricle and  the aorta (aortic valve).  ● 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 3 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  the transitional phase is not completely clear, although changes in heart structure or heart  pumping function may occur as progressively greater volumes of blood are leaking  backward.  You may experience fatigue, with a decreased ability to exercise or be active, or you may  feel short of breath in the transitional phase. However, some people have no symptoms.  Surgical treatment is usually recommended when you enter the transitional phase. (See  'Surgical treatment'   below.)  Decompensated phase   —   As the left ventricle enlarges and functions less efficiently, the  left atrium progressively enlarges, abnormal heart rhythms occur, and the blood pressure  in the pulmonary arteries (the blood vessels from the heart to the lungs) increases; this is  called pulmonary hypertension. Over time, as heart failure develops, these changes  become irreversible. (See   "Patient education: Heart failure (Beyond the Basics)" .)  MITRAL REGURGITATION CAUSES  A trivial amount of mitral regurgitation (MR) is present in up to 70 percent of adults.  Significant (moderate to severe) MR is much less common. When significant MR does  happen, it can be a result of an abnormality in a heart valve or another cardiac disease,  including the following:  Mitral valve prolapse   – Mitral valve prolapse occurs when the mitral valve leaflet  tissue is deformed and elongated so that the leaflets do not come together normally.  This abnormal valve motion may allow blood to leak backwards from the left ventricle  into the left atrium. Although most people with mitral valve prolapse have only trace  or mild MR, some develop significant MR.  ●  Infective endocarditis   – Infective endocarditis is an infection of the heart valves  caused by bacteria, fungi, or other organisms that invade the bloodstream. As the  microorganisms adhere to the valves and grow, abnormal structures (known as  vegetations) develop on the heart valves. The vegetation can prevent the mitral valve  from closing normally, allowing blood to regurgitate. A heart valve that is already  abnormal is more likely to develop endocarditis compared with a valve that is normal.  ●  Rheumatic fever   – Rheumatic fever is a body-wide illness that occurs when the  bacterium that causes Strep throat (group A Streptococcus) is not treated. Rheumatic  ● 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 4 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  MITRAL REGURGITATION SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS  Most people with mitral regurgitation (MR) have no symptoms. People with mild to  moderate MR may never develop symptoms or serious complications.  Even in people with severe MR, there may be no signs or symptoms until the left ventricle  fails, an abnormal heart rhythm develops (atrial fibrillation), or pulmonary hypertension  occurs. Pulmonary hypertension occurs when the blood pressure in the pulmonary artery  is increased. This increases the workload of the right side of the heart, making it difficult to  provide an adequate amount of oxygenated blood to the body.  People with severe MR and left ventricular enlargement may eventually develop signs and  symptoms of heart failure, which include weakness and fatigue, shortness of breath with  exertion and/or at rest, or edema (abnormal fluid collection in the lower legs or abdomen).  (See   "Patient education: Heart failure (Beyond the Basics)" .)  MITRAL REGURGITATION DIAGNOSIS  You may be diagnosed with mitral regurgitation (MR) after your health care provider listens  to your heart with a stethoscope and hears a heart murmur. The murmur is caused by the  sound of turbulent blood flowing backwards through the mitral valve.  A heart murmur may occur as a result of one or more conditions; to determine the cause  fever causes inflammation of the valves of the heart, as well as other complications.  Rheumatic fever is now uncommon in developed countries, although it still occurs  commonly in resource-limited countries.  Congenital heart abnormality   – Children who are born with certain types of heart  abnormalities can develop MR.  ●  Other types of heart disease   – MR can develop as a result of other types of heart  diseases, such as after a heart attack or other cause of heart muscle injury.  ●  Trauma   – Chest trauma can rarely cause breakage of the chords that hold the mitral  leaflets in their normal position. Untethered leaflets swing widely, allowing valve  leakage.  ● 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 5 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  of the murmur, one or more diagnostic tests may be recommended.  Electrocardiogram (ECG)   —   An ECG provides a picture of the electrical activity that causes  the heart to beat. An ECG may detect rhythm disturbances or evidence of coronary heart  disease or other conditions that can cause MR. It can also show evidence of other  associated cardiac abnormalities.  Chest x-ray   —   A chest x-ray shows the size and shape of the heart and the large blood  vessels in the chest. It also can identify fluid accumulation in the lungs. Many people with  significant MR have an enlarged heart.  Echocardiogram   —   An echocardiogram uses ultrasound (high-frequency sound waves) to  assess the size of the heart's chambers, the movement of the heart valves, and the motion  of the heart wall. It can also measure the cardiac output (the volume of blood pumped in  one minute) and some of the pressures within the heart.  In most cases, the echocardiogram is done by pressing a smooth probe against the skin of  the chest or abdomen. Gel is applied to the chest to help the wand glide against the skin  and allow the sound waves to travel through the chest more easily. This type of  echocardiogram is called a transthoracic echocardiogram.  If the images of the heart are not clear with transthoracic echocardiography, a  transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) may be recommended. With TEE, you are given  sedative medication and the probe is inserted into your mouth and passed down the  esophagus. This allows the physician to have a closer and clear view of your heart valves  and other structures.  LIVING WITH SIGNIFICANT MITRAL REGURGITATION  Monitoring over time   —   People with mitral regurgitation (MR) should have periodic  monitoring to determine if and when treatment is needed. The frequency of repeat  echocardiogram depends upon several factors, including the severity of the MR, the size  and function of the left ventricle, and the presence of symptoms.  People with mild MR and normal left ventricular size and function should have an  echocardiogram (an imaging test of the heart) every three to five years.  ● 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 6 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Physical exercise   —   The 2015 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association  guidelines concluded that no exercise restrictions are needed for people who have the  following:  Your health care provider can help to determine if you should exercise or participate in  sports if you have one or more abnormalities of the above (eg, left ventricular  enlargement). Athletes with MR should receive a yearly physical examination,  echocardiogram, and exercise testing to determine what level of activity is safe.  Mitral regurgitation and pregnancy   —   Women with chronic mild to moderate MR usually  have no increased risks as a result of pregnancy. In contrast, women with severe MR,  especially if they have symptoms or other complications of MR, can be at risk of developing  complications during pregnancy. Women with MR should talk to their cardiologist about  the risks and benefits of pregnancy and the possibility of having valve repair or  replacement surgery before trying to become pregnant. Valve repair or replacement  surgery is not recommended during pregnancy except in emergency situations.  Presence of atrial fibrillation   —   People with chronic MR may develop an abnormal heart  rhythm called atrial fibrillation (AF). In AF, rapid, chaotic electrical impulses cause the heart  to beat irregularly rather than in a coordinated fashion. As a result, the patient may sense  an irregular pulse and complain of palpitation. AF can reduce the amount of blood being  pumped out to the body; this is of particular concern in people with MR because the heart  already has a decreased ability to pump blood out. In addition, AF increases the risk of  experiencing a stroke.  People with MR who develop AF are usually treated with a medication to prevent blood  clots and may be given a treatment to normalize the heart rhythm. This is discussed in a  separate article. (See   "Patient education: Atrial fibrillation (Beyond the Basics)" .)  People with moderate MR should have an echocardiogram every one to two years. ●  People with severe MR are usually seen every 6 to 12 months or sooner if symptoms  develop or if the left ventricle size is increasing.  ●  No symptoms of MR ●  A normal heart rhythm ●  Normal size left ventricle and left atrium ●  Normal pulmonary artery pressure ● 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 7 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  After the initial treatment of AF, people with MR are often encouraged to have surgical  valve repair or replacement before the left atrium enlarges substantially. Delaying surgical  repair may make it more difficult to reverse AF to a normal heart rhythm. In people with  MR, chronic AF significantly increases the chance of developing a blood clot (thrombus)  that can break off (embolus) and lodge in an artery in the brain (causing a stroke) or  somewhere else in the body. (See   "Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis  (Beyond the Basics)"   and   "Patient education: Pulmonary embolism (Beyond the Basics)" .)  MITRAL REGURGITATION TREATMENT  Treatment of mitral regurgitation (MR) depends upon the cause of the MR and the  presence and severity of symptoms . Many people with mild or moderate MR do not  require any specific treatment, but should be monitored. (See   'Monitoring over time'  above.)  For people who do need treatment, options include:  Surgical treatment   —   Surgery is required for some people with severe MR (as identified  by echocardiography). (See   'Echocardiogram'   above.)  Surgical treatment may include either repair of your own mitral valve or replacement of the  valve. The choice of procedure depends, at least in part, upon the cause of the MR, the  anatomy of your mitral valve, and the performance of the left ventricle.  The procedure   —   Valve repair or replacement surgery is done in an operating room after  you are given general anesthesia. With the traditional approach, the surgeon makes an  incision in the breastbone (sternum), called a median sternotomy, to open the chest and  gain access to the heart. Other approaches, which do not involve cutting the sternum, are  available, although there are fewer data regarding the safety and efficacy of these newer  techniques.  Surgery to repair or replace the mitral valve ●  A procedure to repair the mitral valve through a thin tube (catheter) ●  Medicine or surgery to correct heart rhythm problems that often affect people with  mitral valve disease  ●  Medicines that make it easier for the heart to do its job ● 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 8 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  To repair or replace the valve, the heart must be stopped temporarily. While the heart is  stopped, a heart-lung machine (cardiopulmonary bypass machine) functions like the heart  and lungs, circulating blood and providing oxygen to the body. Fluids, nutrients, and  medications may be added to the blood while it passes through the cardiopulmonary  bypass machine. The procedure generally lasts between two and four hours.  Valve repair   —   During valve repair, the surgeon will reshape the valve to prevent or  reduce the backwards flow of blood. People who have valve repair do not require lifelong  treatment with an anticoagulant (blood thinner).  Valve replacement   —   If valve replacement is necessary, the replacement valve may be  mechanical (made from metal) or bioprosthetic (made from biologic materials such as a pig  valve). Mechanical valves have the disadvantage of requiring lifelong treatment with a  medication to prevent blood clots ( warfarin   [brand name: Jantoven]), while bioprosthetic  valves (which generally do not require warfarin) have the disadvantage of potentially  wearing out and requiring replacement earlier, particularly in people under age 60. People  who are in atrial fibrillation (AF) generally need lifelong anticoagulation, regardless of  which valve type is used.  When deciding between a mechanical and bioprosthetic heart valve, it is important for you  and your physician to consider the risks of   warfarin   therapy compared with the potential  need for a repeat valve replacement. The use of warfarin is discussed in detail in a separate  article. (See   "Patient education: Warfarin (Beyond the Basics)" .)  In general, experts use guidelines like the following:  Additional procedures   —   When people with MR and AF have valve surgery, they may  have one or more additional procedures at the same time:  A mechanical valve is suggested for patients <70 years of age who do not have a  contraindication to anticoagulation.  ●  A bioprosthetic valve is suggested for patients 70 years old or older. ●  A bioprosthetic valve is recommended in patients of any age for whom anticoagulant  therapy is contraindicated, cannot be managed appropriately, or is not desired by the  patient.  ●  A procedure called "left atrial appendage closure" (also known as left atrial ● 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 9 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Recovery from surgery   —   Most patients are able to leave the hospital within five to six  days after surgery. Some people are able to be discharged after four days, while others  may require a longer stay, especially if complications (eg, bleeding, infection) develop.  Depending upon your occupation, you will probably be able to return to work within two  months after discharge from the hospital. Some people are able to return to work after  one month, while others may require up to three months to feel well enough to return.  You will generally see your surgeon approximately one week after surgery and your  cardiologist one to two weeks later. A postoperative echocardiogram (and sometimes an  electrocardiogram) is usually performed at that time.  Transcatheter mitral valve repair   —   Transcatheter mitral valve repair is a way of  repairing a mitral valve using a clip that is guided into place using a catheter (thin tube).  Transcatheter mitral valve repair is an option for some people with more than moderate  MR.  Treatment with medications   —   One or more medications may be recommended for  some people with MR to relieve the signs and symptoms of heart failure, reduce the  workload of the heart, or prevent complications such as blood clots or infections.  Treatment of heart failure is discussed in detail in a separate topic review. (See   "Patient  education: Heart failure (Beyond the Basics)" .)  Anticoagulants   —   Anticoagulants such as   warfarin   are used to prevent blood clots.  Lifelong treatment with warfarin (brand name: Jantoven) is recommended for certain  people with chronic MR, including those with AF or a mechanical heart valve. (See   "Patient  education: Warfarin (Beyond the Basics)" .)  Preventive antibiotic treatments   —   Infective endocarditis is a bacterial infection that  appendage occlusion or ligation) is often done to reduce the risk of stroke (brain  damage from a blood clot in an artery going to the brain).  A procedure called the "maze procedure" is often done to reduce the likelihood of  long-term AF. During the procedure, several small incisions are made in the left atria  to interrupt the electrical pathways that allow atrial fibrillation to occur. The decision  to perform a maze procedure is based upon the person's age and other factors  because it does increase the length of the operation.  ● 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 10 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  causes the heart valves to become inflamed. Most people with MR who have not  undergone heart valve surgery do   not   require preventive antibiotic treatment before  dental and surgical procedures.  In contrast, people who have a mechanical or bioprosthetic replacement mitral valve or  who have prosthetic material used to repair the mitral valve should have antibiotic  treatment before dental, oral, or upper respiratory tract procedures to reduce the risk of  developing infective endocarditis. This is discussed in detail in a separate article. (See  "Patient education: Antibiotics to prevent heart valve infections (Beyond the Basics)" .)  WHERE TO GET MORE INFORMATION  Your health care provider is the best source of information for questions and concerns  related to your medical problem.  This article will be updated as needed on our web site (   www.uptodate.com/patients ).  Related topics for patients, as well as selected articles written for health care professionals,  are also available. Some of the most relevant are listed below.  Patient level information   —   UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials.  The Basics   —   The Basics patient education pieces answer the four or five key questions a  patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a  general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials.  Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (The Basics)  Patient education: Mitral valve prolapse (The Basics)  Patient education: What can go wrong after a heart attack? (The Basics)  Patient education: Heart murmurs (The Basics)  Patient education: Prosthetic valves (The Basics)  Beyond the Basics   —   Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more  sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are best for patients who want in-depth  information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.  Patient education: Heart failure (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Atrial fibrillation (Beyond the Basics) 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 11 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Patient education: Stroke symptoms and diagnosis (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Pulmonary embolism (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Warfarin (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Antibiotics to prevent heart valve infections (Beyond the Basics)  Professional level information   —   Professional level articles are designed to keep doctors  and other health professionals up-to-date on the latest medical findings. These articles are  thorough, long, and complex, and they contain multiple references to the research on  which they are based. Professional level articles are best for people who are comfortable  with a lot of medical terminology and who want to read the same materials their doctors  are reading.  Arrhythmic complications of mitral valve prolapse  Echocardiographic evaluation of the mitral valve  Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of chronic mitral regurgitation  Indications for intervention for chronic severe primary mitral regurgitation  Natural history of chronic mitral regurgitation caused by mitral valve prolapse and flail  mitral leaflet  Chronic primary mitral regurgitation: General management  Pathophysiology and natural history of chronic mitral regurgitation  Acute mitral regurgitation in adults  Transesophageal echocardiography in the evaluation of mitral valve disease  Valvular heart disease in older adults  The following organizations also provide reliable health information.  (   www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000176.htm )  (   www.nhlbi.nih.gov )  (   www.americanheart.org )  National Library of Medicine ●  National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute ●  American Heart Association ● 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 12 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  The UpToDate editorial staff acknowledges William H Gaasch, MD (deceased), who  contributed to an earlier version of this topic review.  Use of UpToDate is subject to the   Terms of Use .  This generalized information is a limited summary of diagnosis, treatment, and/or  medication information. It is not meant to be comprehensive and should be used as a  tool to help the user understand and/or assess potential diagnostic and treatment  options. It does NOT include all information about conditions, treatments, medications,  side effects, or risks that may apply to a specific patient. It is not intended to be medical  advice or a substitute for the medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment of a health care  provider based on the health care provider's examination and assessment of a patient's  specific and unique circumstances. Patients must speak with a health care provider for  complete information about their health, medical questions, and treatment options,  including any risks or benefits regarding use of medications. This information does not  endorse any treatments or medications as safe, effective, or approved for treating a  specific patient. UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates disclaim any warranty or liability relating  to this information or the use thereof. The use of this information is governed by the  Terms of Use, available at   https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en/know/clinical-  effectiveness-terms   ©2023 UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates and/or licensors. All rights  reserved.  Topic 3437 Version 20.0 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 13 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  GRAPHICS  Chambers and valves of the heart  The heart has 4 main sections, or "chambers." The top 2 chambers are called the  right atrium and left atrium. The bottom 2 chambers are called the right and left  ventricles. Each of these chambers has a valve that keeps blood flowing in 1  direction. The valves in this picture appear in gray. When the heart is working  normally, blood comes in from the body through the right atrium and into the  right ventricle. From there it goes to the lungs, where it picks up oxygen. Then  the blood comes back through the left atrium, into the left ventricle, and back  out to the body through a blood vessel called the aorta. The aorta appears in red.  If a valve doesn't work properly, it will either let blood flow backward in the  wrong direction or not let enough blood flow forward.  Graphic 58389 Version 13.0 04.07.2023 09.24 Patient education: Mitral regurgitation (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 14 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/mitral-regurgitation-beyond-the…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link   