04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 1 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Official reprint from UpToDate  www.uptodate.com   © 2023 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.  Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics)  Please read the   Disclaimer   at the end of this page.  INTRODUCTION  Pacemakers are electronic devices that stimulate the heart with electrical impulses to  maintain or restore a normal heartbeat. This topic review will discuss pacemakers, when  they may be necessary or appropriate, the types of pacemakers that are available, and the  precautions patients need to take after having a pacemaker placed.  THE HEART'S CONDUCTION SYSTEM AND "NATURAL PACEMAKER"  The heart has its own built-in electrical system, called the conduction system (   figure 1 ).  The conduction system sends electrical signals throughout the heart that determine the  timing of the heartbeat and cause the heart to beat in a coordinated, rhythmic pattern. The  conduction system stimulates precise contractions of the heart's chambers to ensure that  blood is pumped effectively.  The electrical signals, or impulses, of the heart are generated by specialized tissue called  the sinoatrial (SA) or sinus node (   figure 1 ). The sinus node is sometimes called the  heart's "natural pacemaker." Each time the sinus node generates a new electrical impulse;  that impulse spreads out through the heart's upper chambers, called the right atrium and  ®  author :   Brian Olshansky, MD  section   editor :   Hugh Calkins, MD  deputy   editor :   Susan B Yeon, MD, JD, FACC  All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our   peer review process   is complete.  Literature review current through:   Jun 2023.  This topic last updated:   Nov 29, 2022. 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 2 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  the left atrium (   figure 2 ). This electrical impulse stimulates the atria to contract,  pumping blood into the lower chambers of the heart (the right and left ventricles).  The electrical impulse then spreads to another area of specialized tissue located between  the atria and the ventricles, the atrioventricular (AV) node. The AV node momentarily slows  down the spread of the electrical impulse, to allow the left and right atria to finish  contracting.  From the AV node, the impulse spreads into a system of specialized fibers called the bundle  of His and the right and left bundle branches (   figure 1 ). These fibers distribute the  electrical impulse rapidly to all areas of the right and left ventricles, stimulating them to  contract in a coordinated way. With this contraction, blood is pumped from the right  ventricle to the lungs, and from the left ventricle throughout the body.  ARRHYTHMIAS  The heart's conduction system must function normally for the heart to beat properly and  to pump blood effectively to meet the body's needs. Problems with the flow of electrical  impulses in the heart can cause heart rhythm disturbances known as "arrhythmias." This  general term indicates an abnormality in the pattern of electrical activation of the heart.  Bradyarrhythmias   —   Bradyarrhythmias are heart rhythm abnormalities that cause the  heart to beat too slow. Most bradyarrhythmias are due to one of two kinds of problems:  sinus bradycardia or heart block.  Sinus bradycardia occurs when the heartbeat is too slow because the heart's "natural  pacemaker" in the top right chamber (the right atrium) is operating too slowly. Although  some people (for example, competitive athletes) may have a slow heartbeat as a result of  good health, in others sinus bradycardia is an abnormal condition that may require  treatment.  Heart block is a term for a delay or interruption in the heart's electrical wiring (the  conduction system), causing the electrical impulses to travel too slowly or to be stopped.  There are several kinds of heart block, classified according to location (where in the  conduction system the block occurs) and degree (whether the block is mild, causing  delayed conduction, or severe, causing conduction to stop). 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 3 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Arrhythmia symptoms   —   The symptoms of arrhythmias vary, depending upon the  specific arrhythmia and other factors, especially if there is underlying heart disease. While  some people may have no symptoms, others may have various symptoms and signs.  Symptoms may include:  The decision to treat an arrhythmia with a pacemaker (or any other treatment) depends in  part upon whether the person has symptoms or not as well as the severity of the  In first-degree atrioventricular (AV) block, all electrical impulses reach the ventricles  from the atria, but are abnormally slowed as they pass through the AV node.  ●  In second-degree AV block, some atrial impulses fail to reach the ventricles ("dropped  beats"), resulting in a slow or an irregular heart rate.  ●  In third-degree AV block, the most serious form, no atrial impulses are conducted to  the ventricles. This condition is sometimes called complete heart block. For the heart  to continue to beat, a separate electrical impulse (called an escape rhythm) may be  generated in the ventricles. Without an escape rhythm, the ventricles (the chambers  that pump blood throughout the body) stop beating.  ●  In right bundle branch block (RBBB), impulses are not conducted by the right bundle  branch. Electrical impulses reach the right ventricle only by traveling through the  heart muscle from the left ventricle. As a result, activation of the right ventricle is  delayed.  ●  In left bundle branch block (LBBB), impulses are not conducted by the left bundle  branch. Electrical impulses reach the left ventricle only by traveling through the heart  muscle from the right ventricle. As a result, activation of the left ventricle is delayed.  ●  Fainting episodes (syncope) (see   "Patient education: Syncope (fainting) (Beyond the  Basics)" )  ●  Dizziness or lightheadedness (a feeling like you might pass out) ●  Palpitations (a sensation of the heart pounding) ●  Confusion ●  Extreme fatigue ●  Shortness of breath ●  Impaired ability of the heart to pump enough blood to meet the body's needs (heart  failure)  ● 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 4 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  symptoms. In some cases, the heart rate is simply too slow, and a pacemaker is needed to  effectively pump the blood out of the heart.  Underlying causes   —   A variety of conditions can lead to the development of cardiac  arrhythmias. Some of the more common causes include:  TEMPORARY AND PERMANENT PACEMAKERS  Artificial pacemakers are electronic devices that stimulate the heart with electrical impulses  to maintain or restore a normal rhythm in people with slow heart rhythms. There are many  situations in which an artificial pacemaker may be recommended.  Most commonly, a pacemaker is used for a slow heart rate (bradyarrhythmia) as described  above. The decision to use such a device, as well as which specific type, will depend upon  multiple factors, including:  Coronary artery disease, where there is a malfunction or damage of the heart due to  narrowing or blockage of arteries supplying blood to heart muscle. This damage is  known as a myocardial infarction or "heart attack."  ●  Certain structural heart malformations present at birth (congenital heart defects). ●  Inherited genetic abnormalities that are not necessarily associated with a structural  problem of the heart, but may result in an arrhythmia (such as the long QT  syndrome).  ●  Abnormalities in the control and regulation of the heart rate and vascular tone by the  nervous system, leading to fainting (called neurocardiogenic syncope).  ●  Diseases of heart muscle tissue, called cardiomyopathies. (See   "Patient education:  Dilated cardiomyopathy (Beyond the Basics)"   and   "Patient education: Hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy (Beyond the Basics)" .)  ●  Therapy with certain medications that may alter the heart's normal rhythm. ●  Aging of heart muscle. ●  The exact nature and underlying cause of the arrhythmia ●  Whether the condition is temporary or permanent ● 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 5 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  How they work   —   An artificial pacemaker provides an electrical impulse (or "discharge")  that can stimulate the heart, thus restoring or maintaining a regular heartbeat. Although  various types of artificial pacemaker devices are available, they generally include the  following components:  Types of pacemakers   —   A variety of types of pacemakers and modes of pacing have been  developed to restore or sustain a regular heartbeat in different ways. All contemporary  pacemakers sense the intrinsic activity and stimulate the heart only when the intrinsic  heart rate falls below the programmed pacing rate. Essentially all contemporary  pacemakers also incorporate rate responsive capability. This depends on a "sensor"  incorporated into the pacemaker that can sense activity or respiratory rate and can alter  the heart rate based on the perceived physiologic need.  Pacemakers may also be single, dual, or triple chambered:  The presence or absence of symptoms as described above ●  The anticipated frequency of pacing ●  The underlying cardiac conditions ●  A thin metal box or case called a pulse generator (   picture 1 ) contains the power  source producing electrical impulses to stimulate the heart muscle. In addition, the  pulse generator contains a small computer processor that can be programmed to set  the rate of the pacemaker, the pattern of pacing, the energy output, and various  other parameters. Signals are often sent through a box to the clinician's office to  report on how well the pacemaker is working. The pulse generator for most modern  permanent pacemakers weighs one to two ounces. (See   'Types of pacemakers'  below.)  ●  Flexible insulated wires, known as leads, carry electrical impulses from the generator  to the heart muscle and relay information concerning the heart's natural activities  back to the pacemaker. There may be several such wires, or leads, placed within the  heart, most commonly in the right atrium and right ventricle; one type of pacemaker  is "leadless" and does not have any wires.  ●  The pacing lead most commonly incorporates one or two electrical "poles." An  electrical impulse is transmitted to the heart muscle when needed, and the lead is  also able to sense the heart's intrinsic electrical activity.  ● 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 6 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Temporary pacemakers   —   Temporary pacemakers are intended for short-term use  during hospitalization. They are used because the arrhythmia is expected to be temporary  and eventually resolve, or because the person requires temporary treatment until a  permanent pacemaker can be placed.  The pulse generator of a temporary pacemaker is located outside the body, and may be  taped to the skin or attached to a belt or to the patient's bed.  Patients with temporary pacemakers are hospitalized and continuously monitored.  Members of the health care team will perform regular examinations to monitor for any  possible complications.  Permanent pacemakers   —   Permanent pacemakers are pacemakers that are intended for  long-term use.  Indications   —   Specific guidelines have been established concerning the conditions when  a permanent pacemaker is (I) definitely beneficial, useful, and effective, (II) may be  indicated, or (III) is not useful or effective and, in some cases, may be harmful. Patients  should speak with their health care provider concerning these guidelines and how they  apply to their specific case.  As a general rule, permanent pacing is recommended for certain conditions that are  chronic or recurrent and not due to a transient cause. Permanent pacing may be  Single-chamber pacemakers have one lead to carry impulses to and from either the  right atrium or right ventricle.  ●  A dual-chamber pacemaker characteristically has two leads, one to the right atrium  and one to the right ventricle or conduction system, which can allow a heart rhythm  that more naturally resembles the normal activities of the heart and reflects intrinsic  depolarization.  ●  Triple-chambered pacemakers typically have one lead in the right atrium, one to  stimulate the right ventricle, and one to stimulate the left ventricle. These devices are  used in patients who have weakened heart muscle (which results in heart failure).  These pacemakers "resynchronize" the ventricles and may improve the efficiency of  the contraction of the heart. They are also commonly referred to as "biventricular  pacemakers."  ● 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 7 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  considered necessary or appropriate for certain people with symptomatic bradyarrhythmia  or, less commonly, to help prevent or terminate tachyarrhythmia.  Implantation   —   The pacemaker is most commonly implanted into soft tissue beneath  the skin in an area below the clavicle, which is known as prepectoral implantation  (   figure 3 ); this is located under the skin and fat tissue but above the pectoral muscle.  The pacemaker leads are typically inserted into a major vein (transvenously) and advanced  until the leads are secured within the proper region(s) of heart muscle. The other ends of  the leads are attached to the pulse generator (   figure 4 ).  Less commonly, the pulse generator is placed under the skin of the upper abdomen.  Generally the pacemaker is implanted in a sterile laboratory or operating room by a  specialist (cardiologist, surgeon, or cardiac electrophysiologist) with experience in this  procedure. Local anesthesia and often conscious sedation are used to make the procedure  as pain-free as possible. General anesthesia is rarely required. The position of the  pacemaker leads is usually checked using X-ray imaging (called fluoroscopy). The length of  the procedure depends upon the type of device being placed.  Leadless pacemakers are generally implanted through a leg vein and placed directly in the  heart muscle without the need for a separate pulse generator.  Recovery from the procedure is rapid, but there may be some restrictions on arm  movement and activities for the first two to four weeks. Lead dislodgement is more  common in the first few weeks after implantation. The hospital stay is usually brief, and the  procedure can be performed as an outpatient. Uncommon but possible risks associated  with permanent pacemaker implantation include collapsed lung (pneumothorax), infection,  perforation/tamponade, and bleeding.  Once implanted, pacemakers can be programmed to change the baseline heart rate, the  upper heart rate at which the pacemaker will pace, and heart rate changes that should  occur with exercise.  Follow-up care   —   People who have a permanent pacemaker will require periodic  surveillance of the implanted device. The status of the pacemaker will be regularly checked  or "interrogated" (often done remotely using a telephone or a secure web-based system)  to provide information regarding the type of heart rhythm, the functioning of the  pacemaker leads, the frequency of utilization of the pacemaker, the battery life, and the 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 8 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  presence of any abnormal heart rhythms.  All contemporary devices are programmable with information and settings that can be  altered and stored. Information is obtained by transmitting data from the pulse generator  to a programmer, usually done during a follow-up office visit. However, with newer pulse  generators it may be possible to obtain information about the pacemaker's performance  by downloading data from the patient's device to the internet and then to the caregiver's  office. In older devices, pacemaker status can be checked routinely via the telephone using  a trans-telephonic device.  The pulse generators are usually powered by   lithium   batteries that function for an average  of five to eight years before they need to be replaced. When the batteries start to wear out,  they do so in a very slow and predictable fashion, allowing sufficient time to be detected  and pulse-generator replacement planned. Replacing the pulse generator usually requires  a simple procedure in which a skin incision is made over the old incision, the old generator  is removed, and a new generator is implanted and joined with the existing leads, assuming  the existing leads are functioning normally.  The pacemaker leads are usually used indefinitely, unless a specific problem occurs (eg, the  lead loses contact with the heart, the lead breaks, or the lead is not functioning properly).  In such circumstances, the lead may require replacement. Often, the old lead is left in place  but disconnected from the pulse generator and capped, and a new lead is inserted.  Removal of an old lead is feasible but difficult in most cases, because of the formation of  scar tissue binding the lead to the blood vessels and heart muscle. Lead removal is usually  necessary if the system becomes infected.  AVOIDING ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE  Although contemporary pacemakers are less susceptible to interference than older  models, electromagnetic energy can interfere in some cases. Thus, experts advise that  people with pacemakers be aware of the following:  Household appliances   —   Pacemaker manufacturers do not recommend any special  precautions when using normally functioning common household appliances such as  microwave ovens, televisions, radios, toasters, and electric blankets.  Cellular phones   —   People with a pacemaker or a defibrillator should know that items with 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 9 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  strong magnetic fields (eg, cellular phones with magnets for wireless charging [iPhone 12],  magnetic accessories such as certain “smart watches”) can affect the function of the device  if they are very close (less than six inches) to their device. Cell phones without strong  magnets are unlikely to cause problems with pacemakers or defibrillators.  If you have a pacemaker or a defibrillator, the safest strategy is to use your cell phone at  the ear on the side opposite the cardiac device. When you are carrying your phone, keep it  in a pocket or bag below your waist. If you’re not sure whether your phone or watch is  likely to cause problems with your cardiac device, check with the manufacturer or your  doctor.  Anti-theft systems   —   Electromagnetic anti-theft security systems are often found in or  near the workplace, at airports, in stores, at courthouses, or in other high-security areas.  Although interference with a pacemaker is possible, it is unlikely that any clinically  significant interference would occur with the transient exposure associated with walking  through such a field. Based upon several studies and observations, experts advise that  patients with pacemakers should:  Metal detectors at airports   —   Similar to antitheft systems, metal detectors at airports can  potentially interfere with pacemakers, although this is unlikely. Such exposure has been  shown to cause interference in some cases and may be related to the duration of exposure  and/or distance between the security system and the pacemaker. Metal detectors will likely  be triggered by the presence of a pacemaker and therefore at places such as airports, it  will be important for individuals with pacemakers to carry an identification card for their  pacemaker, and airport personnel will likely prefer to do a manual search.  External electrical equipment   —   External electrical fields do not seem to cause a problem  for most people with a pacemaker. However, in workplaces that contain welding  equipment or strong motor-generator systems, because interference can inhibit pacing, it  is recommended that a person with an implanted cardiac device remain at least two feet  from external electrical equipment, verify that the equipment is properly grounded, and  leave the immediate locale if lightheadedness or other symptoms develop.  Be aware of the location of anti-theft systems and move through them at a normal  pace  ●  Avoid leaning on or standing close to an anti-theft system ● 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 10 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Diagnostic or therapeutic procedures   —   Certain types of surgery and procedures may  interfere with pacemakers. Most importantly, the use of electrocautery can inhibit  pacemaker function. It is not uncommon therefore that a pulse generator may require  specific reprogramming before the procedure and programming back to its baseline  condition after the procedure. In some instances, a magnet is all that is required on the  device to make sure that there is no problem with the device during the procedure. Such  procedures include:  Thus, doctors, dentists, and other health care providers should be informed about a  person's pacemaker. If a procedure associated with pacemaker interference is  contemplated, the possible benefits, risks, and alternatives should be considered and  discussed, as appropriate. People with pacemakers should carry a medical identification  card for emergencies.  WHERE TO GET MORE INFORMATION  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which uses a strong magnetic field that is pulsed  on and off at a rapid rate. In the past, this procedure was a relative contraindication  for patients with a pacemaker. However, with the introduction of specialized  pacemakers that are "MRI safe," MRI scans can be performed. Even patients with a  standard pacemaker (ie, not designated "MRI safe") can often undergo MRI scans  with careful monitoring and other appropriate precautions.  ●  Transcutaneous electrical nerve/muscle stimulators (TENS), a method of pain control. ●  Diathermy, which heats body tissues with high-frequency electromagnetic radiation  or microwaves.  ●  Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy, the use of sound waves to break up gallstones  and kidney stones.  ●  Therapeutic radiation for cancer or tumors, which can cause permanent pacemaker  damage.  ●  Any surgery in which electrocautery is being used. The risks are greatest when the  electrocautery is being performed close to the pulse generator.  ● 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 11 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Your health care provider is the best source of information for questions and concerns  related to your medical problem. The manufacturer of your device likely also has a patient  call line, and the number would be listed on your identification card.  This article will be updated as needed on our web site  (   www.uptodate.com/contents/table-of-contents/patient-information ). Related topics for  patients, as well as selected articles written for health care professionals, are also available.  Some of the most relevant are listed below.  Patient level information   —   UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials.  The Basics   —   The Basics patient education pieces answer the four or five key questions a  patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a  general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials.  Patient education: Pacemakers (The Basics)  Patient education: Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (The Basics)  Patient education: Catheter ablation for the heart (The Basics)  Patient education: Cardiac resynchronization therapy (The Basics)  Patient education: Bradycardia (The Basics)  Patient education: Sinus node dysfunction (The Basics)  Patient education: Long QT syndrome (The Basics)  Beyond the Basics   —   Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more  sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are best for patients who want in-depth  information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.  Patient education: Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Atrial fibrillation (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Syncope (fainting) (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Dilated cardiomyopathy (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Beyond the Basics)  Professional level information   —   Professional level articles are designed to keep doctors  and other health professionals up-to-date on the latest medical findings. These articles are  thorough, long, and complex, and they contain multiple references to the research on  which they are based. Professional level articles are best for people who are comfortable  with a lot of medical terminology and who want to read the same materials their doctors 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 12 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  are reading.  Cardiac implantable electronic device interactions with electromagnetic fields in the  nonhospital environment  Cardiac resynchronization therapy in heart failure: System implantation and programming  Cardiac resynchronization therapy in heart failure: Indications and choice of system  Dual chamber pacing system malfunctions of timing, sensing, and capture: Evaluation and  management  Permanent cardiac pacing: Overview of devices and indications  Infections involving cardiac implantable electronic devices: Epidemiology, microbiology,  clinical manifestations, and diagnosis  Modes of cardiac pacing: Nomenclature and selection  Pacing system malfunction: Evaluation and management  Temporary cardiac pacing  Sinus node dysfunction: Treatment  The following organizations also provide reliable health information.  (   medlineplus.gov/pacemakersandimplantabledefibrillators.html , available in Spanish)  (   www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/dci/Diseases/pace/pace_whatis.html )  (   www.acc.org )  (   www.heart.org )  (   www.hrsonline.org/patient-resources )  [ 1-4 ]  National Library of Medicine ●  National Heart, Lung & Blood Institute (NHLBI) ●  American College of Cardiology (ACC) ●  American Heart Association ●  Heart Rhythm Society ● 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 13 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  The UpToDate editorial staff would like to thank David L Hayes, MD, and Leonard Ganz, MD,  FHRS, FACC, who contributed to earlier versions of this topic review.  Use of UpToDate is subject to the   Terms of Use .  This generalized information is a limited summary of diagnosis, treatment, and/or  medication information. It is not meant to be comprehensive and should be used as a  tool to help the user understand and/or assess potential diagnostic and treatment  options. It does NOT include all information about conditions, treatments, medications,  side effects, or risks that may apply to a specific patient. It is not intended to be medical  advice or a substitute for the medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment of a health care  provider based on the health care provider's examination and assessment of a patient's  specific and unique circumstances. Patients must speak with a health care provider for  complete information about their health, medical questions, and treatment options,  including any risks or benefits regarding use of medications. This information does not  endorse any treatments or medications as safe, effective, or approved for treating a  specific patient. UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates disclaim any warranty or liability relating  to this information or the use thereof. The use of this information is governed by the  Terms of Use, available at   https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en/know/clinical-  effectiveness-terms   ©2023 UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates and/or licensors. All rights  reserved.  Topic 3448 Version 31.0 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 14 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  GRAPHICS  The conduction system of the heart  The heart has its own built-in electrical system, called the conduction system.  The conduction system sends electrical signals throughout the heart that  determine the timing of the heartbeat and cause the heart to beat in a  coordinated, rhythmic pattern. The electrical signals, or impulses, of the heart  are generated by a clump of specialized tissue called the sinus node. Each time  the sinus node generates a new electrical impulse, that impulse spreads out  through the heart's upper chambers, called the right atrium and the left  atrium. This electrical impulse, as it spreads across the two atria, stimulates  them to contract, pumping blood into the right and left ventricles. The  electrical impulse then spreads to the atrioventricular (AV) node, which is  another clump of specialized tissue located between the atria and the  ventricles. The AV node momentarily slows down the spread of the electrical  impulse, to allow the left and right atria to finish contracting. From the AV  node, the impulse spreads into a system of specialized fibers called the His  bundle and the right and left bundle branches. These fibers distribute the  electrical impulse rapidly to all areas of the right and left ventricles, stimulating  them to contract in a coordinated way. With this contraction, blood is pumped  from the right ventricle to the lungs, and from the left ventricle throughout the  body.  Graphic 71235 Version 3.0 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 15 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Anatomy of the interior of the heart  Graphic 77576 Version 4.0 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 16 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Pacemakers  This picture shows several different examples of pacemakers.  Graphic 104624 Version 1.0 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 17 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Pacemaker  A pacemaker sits under the skin near a person's heart.  Graphic 128077 Version 2.0 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 18 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  ICDs and pacemakers compared  Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs)   work differently than  pacemakers do. Both devices are implanted under the skin and have  wires called "electrodes" leading to the heart. Both devices send  electrical signals to the heart to keep it beating normally. But ICDs  can give a much more powerful jolt to the heart if it starts to beat in  a dangerous way. Pacemakers cannot do that.  http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/dci/Diseases/icd/icd_whatis.html.  Graphic 67053 Version 8.0 04.07.2023 09.27 Patient education: Pacemakers (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 19 af 19 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pacemakers-beyond-the-basics/p…ation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link   