04.07.2023 09.21 Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (The Basics) - UpToDate  Side 1 af 6 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/wolff-parkinson-white-syndrome-…ucation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Official reprint from UpToDate  www.uptodate.com   © 2023 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.  Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome  (The Basics)  Written by the doctors and editors at UpToDate  Please read the   Disclaimer   at the end of this page.  What is Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome?  Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome is a condition that can cause fast heartbeats that  in turn cause episodes of dizziness or fainting.  People with WPW syndrome can have episodes when their heart beats much faster than  normal. This can cause symptoms. The fast heartbeat can come and go suddenly.  Sometimes, a fast heartbeat goes back to normal on its own. Other times, treatment is  needed.  How do normal heartbeats happen?  A normal heartbeat happens when an electrical signal starts in one spot near the top of  the heart. This electrical signal follows a path to spread across the heart. As it spreads, the  signal causes the heart muscle to squeeze. Each time the heart squeezes, blood is sent all  over the body. Normally, the heart beats in a regular way 60 to 100 times a minute.  People can have abnormal heartbeats if:  ®  The electrical signal does not start in the right place ●  The electrical signal does not follow the right path as it spreads across the heart ● 04.07.2023 09.21 Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (The Basics) - UpToDate  Side 2 af 6 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/wolff-parkinson-white-syndrome-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Why is the heartbeat abnormal in WPW syndrome?  The heartbeat can be abnormal in WPW syndrome, because people with WPW syndrome  have an abnormal extra path in the heart. When the electrical signal follows the abnormal  extra path, the heart can beat at a rate that is much faster than normal.  Some people have an abnormal extra path in their heart, but they do not have a fast  heartbeat. These people do not have any symptoms and do not have WPW syndrome.  Instead, they have a "WPW pattern." These people usually do not need treatment.  What are the symptoms of WPW syndrome?  People with WPW syndrome can have symptoms that include:  Most people with WPW syndrome do not have any other heart problems, but some do.  People with WPW syndrome who have other heart problems can have more serious  symptoms. These include:  WPW syndrome can be life-threatening, because it can cause sudden death. But this is  rare.  Is there a test for WPW syndrome?  Yes. Doctors can diagnose WPW syndrome by doing a test called an "electrocardiogram"  (also called an "ECG") (   figure 1 ). An ECG measures the electrical activity in the heart. It  can show if a person has an abnormal heart rhythm or rate.  Sometimes, a doctor will do another procedure to figure out where the extra path is and if  it needs to be treated.  Feeling their heart beating too fast ●  Feeling dizzy or light-headed ●  Fainting ●  Chest pain ●  Trouble breathing ● 04.07.2023 09.21 Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (The Basics) - UpToDate  Side 3 af 6 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/wolff-parkinson-white-syndrome-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  How is WPW syndrome treated?  WPW syndrome is treated in different ways. Some treatments can stop episodes of fast  heartbeats. Other treatments can prevent episodes of fast heartbeats from happening in  the future.  What treatments can stop a fast heartbeat?  Treatments that can control a fast heartbeat include:  What treatments can prevent future episodes of fast heartbeats?  Treatments that can prevent future episodes of fast heartbeats include:  Actions – Actions that people can do themselves include: ●  Coughing or "bearing down" – Bearing down is when a person tightens their belly  as if they are trying to have a bowel movement.  •  Pressing on and massaging the main artery on the side of the neck •  Medicines ●  A procedure called "cardioversion" – This involves applying an electrical current to  the heart to fix its rhythm.  ●  A procedure called "radiofrequency catheter ablation" – This procedure can stop the  abnormal path from spreading the electrical signal. During the procedure, a doctor  puts thin wires into the blood vessels in the groin (inner thigh) or another part of the  body. They thread the wires up through the blood vessels and into the heart. Then  they use the wires to disconnect the abnormal path.  ●  Medicines – Some people need to take medicines every day. ●  Surgery – A doctor can do surgery to disconnect the abnormal path in the heart. But  radiofrequency catheter ablation is done far more often than surgery.  ● 04.07.2023 09.21 Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (The Basics) - UpToDate  Side 4 af 6 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/wolff-parkinson-white-syndrome-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  More on this topic  Patient education: Catheter ablation for the heart (The Basics)  Patient education: Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (The Basics)  Patient education: Atrial fibrillation (The Basics)  Patient education: Pacemakers (The Basics)  Patient education: ECG and stress test (The Basics)  Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Catheter ablation for abnormal heartbeats (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Cardioversion (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (Beyond the Basics)  Patient education: Atrial fibrillation (Beyond the Basics)  All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our   peer review process   is complete.  This topic retrieved from UpToDate on:   Jul 04, 2023.  This generalized information is a limited summary of diagnosis, treatment, and/or  medication information. It is not meant to be comprehensive and should be used as a  tool to help the user understand and/or assess potential diagnostic and treatment  options. It does NOT include all information about conditions, treatments, medications,  side effects, or risks that may apply to a specific patient. It is not intended to be medical  advice or a substitute for the medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment of a health care  provider based on the health care provider's examination and assessment of a patient's  specific and unique circumstances. Patients must speak with a health care provider for  complete information about their health, medical questions, and treatment options,  including any risks or benefits regarding use of medications. This information does not  endorse any treatments or medications as safe, effective, or approved for treating a  specific patient. UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates disclaim any warranty or liability relating  to this information or the use thereof. The use of this information is governed by the  Terms of Use, available at   https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en/know/clinical-  effectiveness-terms   ©2023 UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates and/or licensors. All rights  reserved.  Topic 15669 Version 11.0 04.07.2023 09.21 Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (The Basics) - UpToDate  Side 5 af 6 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/wolff-parkinson-white-syndrome-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  GRAPHICS  Person having an ECG  This drawing shows a person having an ECG (also called an electrocardiogram  or EKG). There are patches, called "electrodes," stuck onto the chest, arms, and  legs. Wires run from the electrodes to the ECG machine. An ECG measures the  electrical activity in the heart.  Graphic 53145 Version 3.0 04.07.2023 09.21 Patient education: Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (The Basics) - UpToDate  Side 6 af 6 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/wolff-parkinson-white-syndrome-…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link   