04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 1 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-th…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Official reprint from UpToDate  www.uptodate.com   © 2023 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.  Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the  Basics)  Please read the   Disclaimer   at the end of this page.  INTRODUCTION  Normally during sleep, air moves in and out through the nose, throat, and lungs at a  regular rhythm. In a person with sleep apnea, air movement is periodically reduced or  stopped. There are two types of sleep apnea, obstructive sleep apnea and central (non-  obstructive) sleep apnea; some forms of apnea involve both types (a “mixed” apnea). For  both types of sleep apnea, there is a reduction in breathing. In obstructive sleep apnea,  breathing becomes abnormal because of narrowing or closure of the throat. In central  sleep apnea, breathing is abnormal because of a change in the breathing control and  rhythm, but the throat remains open.  Sleep apnea is a serious condition that can affect sleep satisfaction and quality, alertness  and efficiency while awake, and the ability to safely drive a motor vehicle; it can also impact  long term health. Approximately 25 percent of adults are at risk for sleep apnea of some  degree [ 1 ]. Males are more commonly affected than females, but after menopause it is  more equal. Other risk factors include middle and older age, being overweight or obese,  and having a small mouth and throat.  This topic review focuses on the most common type of sleep apnea in adults, obstructive  ®  author :   Kingman P Strohl, MD  section   editor :   Nancy Collop, MD  deputy   editor :   Geraldine Finlay, MD  All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our   peer review process   is complete.  Literature review current through:   Jun 2023.  This topic last updated:   Jul 08, 2021. 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 2 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-th…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  sleep apnea (OSA).  HOW SLEEP APNEA OCCURS  The throat is surrounded by muscles that control the airway for speaking, swallowing, and  breathing. These muscles hang from the skull and jaw and surround a flexible tube (the  main airway that brings air to the lungs). During sleep, muscles are less active, which can  cause the throat to narrow (   figure 1 ). In most people, this narrowing does not affect  breathing. In others, it can cause snoring, sometimes with reduced or completely blocked  airflow (   figure 2 ). A completely blocked airway without airflow is called an obstructive  apnea. Partial obstruction with diminished airflow is called a hypopnea. A person may have  both sleep apnea and hypopnea.  Insufficient breathing due to apnea or hypopnea causes oxygen levels to fall and carbon  dioxide levels to rise. Because the airway is blocked, breathing faster or harder does not  help to improve oxygen levels until the airway is reopened. Typically, the obstruction  requires the person to briefly awaken to activate upper airway muscles. Once the airway is  opened, the person then takes several deep breaths to catch up on breathing. As the  person awakens, he or she may move briefly, snort, or loudly snore. Less frequently, a  person may awaken completely with a sensation of gasping, smothering, or choking.  If the person falls back to sleep quickly, he or she will not remember the event. Many  people with sleep apnea are unaware of their abnormal breathing in sleep, and all patients  underestimate how often their sleep is interrupted. Awakening from sleep causes sleep to  be unrefreshing and causes a sense of fatigue and wake time sleepiness.  Anatomic causes of obstructive sleep apnea   —   Some patients have OSA because of a  small upper airway. As the bones of the face and skull develop, some people develop a  small lower face, a small mouth, and a tongue that seems too large for the mouth. These  features are largely genetically determined, which explains why OSA tends to cluster in  some families. Obesity also increases the risk of airway closure. Tonsil enlargement can be  an important cause, especially in children. While these factors increase the risk of sleep  apnea, they are not likely to cause noticeable symptoms or problems while the person is  awake. 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 3 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-th…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  SLEEP APNEA SYMPTOMS  The major symptoms of OSA are loud snoring, fatigue, and feeling sleepy during the day  (or whenever the person is normally awake). However, some people have no symptoms.  For example, if the person does not have a bed partner, they may not be aware of the  snoring. Fatigue and sleepiness have many causes and are often attributed to overwork  and increasing age. As a result, it may take time for a person to recognize that they have a  problem. A bed partner or spouse often prompts the person to seek medical attention (eg,  for pauses, snorts, and snoring during sleep).  Other symptoms may include one or more of the following:  Risk factors   —   Certain factors increase the risk of sleep apnea.  SLEEP APNEA HEALTH CONSEQUENCES  Restless sleep ●  Awakening with choking, gasping, or smothering ●  Morning headaches, dry mouth, or sore throat ●  Waking frequently to urinate ●  Awakening unrested, groggy ●  Low energy, difficulty concentrating, memory impairment ●  Increasing age – OSA occurs at all ages, but it is more common in middle and older  age adults.  ●  Male sex and hormones – OSA is twice as common in males as females, especially in  middle aged males and in those on replacement hormones.  ●  Obesity – The more obese a person is, the more likely he or she is to have OSA. ●  Sedation from medication or alcohol – These reduce breathing and prevent  awakening during sleep, and can lengthen periods of apnea (no breathing), with  potentially dangerous consequences.  ●  Abnormality of the airway that narrows it (eg, large tonsils). ● 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 4 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-th…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Complications of sleep apnea can include reduced alertness, difficulty concentrating, and  sleepiness. The consequence is an increased risk of crashes, accidents, and errors. Studies  have shown that people with severe OSA are more than twice as likely to be involved in a  motor vehicle accident as people without sleep apnea. People with OSA are encouraged to  recognize this risk and discuss options for driving, working, and performing other high-risk  tasks with a healthcare provider.  In addition, people with untreated OSA may have an increased risk or worsened control of  cardiovascular problems such as high blood pressure, heart attack, abnormal heart  rhythms, or stroke [ 2 ]. This risk may be due to changes in the heart rate and blood  pressure that occur during sleep.  SLEEP APNEA DIAGNOSIS  The diagnosis of OSA and a plan to manage it is best made by a knowledgeable sleep  medicine specialist who has an understanding of the individual's health issues. The  diagnosis is usually based upon the person's medical history, physical examination, and  testing, including:  An overnight sleep study is called a polysomnogram. The polysomnogram measures the  breathing effort and airflow, blood oxygen level, heart rate and rhythm, duration of the  various stages of sleep, body position, and movement of the arms/legs.  At-home devices are available that monitor breathing, oxygen saturation, position, and  heart rate, but not sleep itself. Home monitoring is a reasonable alternative to  A complaint of snoring and ineffective sleep ●  Neck size (greater than 17 inches in men or 16 inches in women) is associated with an  increased risk of sleep apnea  ●  A small upper airway: difficulty seeing the throat because of a tongue that is large for  the mouth  ●  High blood pressure, especially if it is resistant to treatment ●  If a bed partner has observed the patient during episodes of stopped breathing  (apnea), choking, or gasping during sleep, there is a strong possibility of sleep apnea  ● 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 5 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-th…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  conventional testing in a sleep laboratory if the clinician strongly suspects moderate or  severe sleep apnea and the patient does not have other illnesses or sleep disorders that  may interfere with interpretation of the results.  SLEEP APNEA TREATMENT  The goal of treatment is to maintain an open airway during sleep. Effective treatment will  eliminate the symptoms of sleep disturbance; long-term health consequences are also  reduced. Most treatments require nightly use. The challenge for the clinician and the  patient is to select an effective therapy that is appropriate for the patient's problem and  that is acceptable for long term use.  Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)   —   The most effective predictable, and  commonly used treatment for sleep apnea uses air pressure from a mechanical device to  keep the upper airway open during sleep. A CPAP device (   figure 3 ) uses an air-tight  attachment to the nose, typically a mask, connected to a tube and a blower which  generates the pressure [ 3 ]. Devices should fit comfortably into the nasal opening, or over  the nose or nose and mouth. CPAP should be used any time the person sleeps (day or  night).  The CPAP device can be started in the sleep lab, where a technician can adjust the pressure  and select the best equipment to keep the airway open. Alternatively, an "auto" device with  a self-adjusting pressure feature, provided with proper education and training, can get  treatment started without another sleep test. CPAP devices are now relatively quiet, and  having a comfortable mask fit is key, but most people will accept the treatment if it  improves their symptoms. However, difficulty with mask comfort and/or nasal congestion  result in a reduction of regular use to only 50 percent of people after two years.  Continued follow-up with a healthcare provider helps promote effective treatment as  technology improves. Information from the CPAP machine is often used by you, physicians,  therapists, and insurers to track the success of treatment. CPAP can be delivered with  different features to improve comfort and solve problems that may come up during  treatment. Changes in treatment may be needed if symptoms do not improve or if the  person's condition changes, such as a gain or loss of weight.  Behavior and lifestyle changes   —   Most people with OSA can benefit from certain 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 6 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-th…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  behavior changes.  Changing sleep position   —   Adjusting sleep position (to stay off the back) may help  improve sleep quality in people who have OSA when sleeping on the back. However, this is  difficult to maintain throughout the night and is rarely an adequate solution.  Weight loss   —   Weight loss is very helpful for people who are obese or overweight.  Weight loss through dietary changes, exercise, and/or surgical treatment is equally  effective. However, it can be difficult to maintain weight loss; the five-year success of non-  surgical weight loss is only 5 percent, meaning that 95 percent of people regain lost  weight. (See   "Patient education: Losing weight (Beyond the Basics)" .)  Avoiding alcohol and other sedatives   —   Alcohol can worsen sleepiness, increasing the  risk of accidents or injury. People with OSA are often counseled to drink little to no alcohol,  even during the daytime. Similarly, people who take anti-anxiety medications or sedatives  to sleep should speak with their healthcare provider about the impact of these medications  on sleep apnea.  If you have OSA, you will need to notify other healthcare providers, including surgeons,  about your condition and the potential risks of being sedated. People with OSA who are  given perioperative anesthesia and/or pain medications require special management and  close monitoring to reduce the risk of a blocked airway.  Other treatments   —   While behavioral changes and CPAP are typically recommended as  initial therapy for people with OSA, other treatments may be used in some situations.  Appliances   —   An oral appliance (or "mandibular advancement device") can reposition the  jaw, bringing the tongue and soft palate forward to relieve obstruction in some people [ 4 ].  Oral appliances work very well to reduce snoring, although the effect on OSA is sometimes  more limited [ 4 ]. As a result, they are best used for mild cases of OSA when relief of  snoring is the main goal. While oral appliances are not as effective as CPAP for OSA, they  may be an alternative for people who cannot tolerate (or choose not to have) CPAP. Side  effects of oral appliances are generally minor but may include changes to the bite with  prolonged use.  Other devices that aim to reduce snoring and improve sleep are also available over the  counter or by prescription. These include strips that are placed over the nose or nostrils 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 7 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-th…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  with the goal of helping keep the airway open. While some people find these devices  helpful, there is limited evidence for their efficacy in treating sleep apnea. If you are  interested in trying one of these devices, be sure to read all labels and instructions  carefully, and discuss it your health care provider first.  Upper airway surgery   —   Surgery is an alternative for patients who cannot tolerate or do  not improve with nonsurgical treatments. Surgery can also be used in combination with  other nonsurgical treatments.  Surgical procedures reshape structures in the upper airways or surgically reposition bone  or soft tissue. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) removes the uvula and excessive tissue in  the throat, including the tonsils, if present. Other procedures, such as maxillomandibular  advancement (MMA), address both the upper and lower pharyngeal airway more globally.  UPPP alone has limited success rates (less than 50 percent) and people can relapse (when  OSA symptoms return after surgery) [ 5 ]. As a result, this surgery is only recommended in a  minority of people and should be considered with caution. MMA may have a higher  success rate, particularly in people with abnormal jaw (maxilla and mandible) anatomy, but  it is a complicated procedure.  Tracheostomy creates a permanent opening in the neck. It is reserved for people with  severe disease in whom less drastic measures have failed or are inappropriate. Although  successful in eliminating obstructive sleep apnea, tracheostomy requires significant  lifestyle changes and carries some serious risks (eg, infection, bleeding, blockage).  There is increasing experience with a surgical approach that involves nerve stimulation to  prevent the upper airway from closing during sleep. While there are specific criteria a  person must meet in order to be a candidate for this procedure, it can sometimes help if  other treatments have not been effective.  All surgical treatments require discussions about the goals of treatment, the expected  outcomes, and potential complications.  WHERE TO GET MORE INFORMATION  Your healthcare provider is the best source of information for questions and concerns  related to your medical problem. 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 8 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-th…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  This article will be updated as needed on our web site (   www.uptodate.com/patients ).  Related topics for patients, as well as selected articles written for healthcare professionals,  are also available. Some of the most relevant are listed below.  Patient level information   —   UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials.  The Basics   —   The Basics patient education pieces answer the four or five key questions a  patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a  general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials.  Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (The Basics)  Patient education: Sleep apnea in children (The Basics)  Patient education: Daytime sleepiness (The Basics)  Patient education: What is a sleep study? (The Basics)  Beyond the Basics   —   Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are longer, more  sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are best for patients who want in-depth  information and are comfortable with some medical jargon.  Patient education: Losing weight (Beyond the Basics)  Professional level information   —   Professional level articles are designed to keep doctors  and other health professionals up-to-date on the latest medical findings. These articles are  thorough, long, and complex, and they contain multiple references to the research on  which they are based. Professional level articles are best for people who are comfortable  with a lot of medical terminology and who want to read the same materials their doctors  are reading.  Assessing and managing nonadherence with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)  for adults with obstructive sleep apnea  Obstructive sleep apnea and cardiovascular disease in adults  Central sleep apnea: Risk factors, clinical presentation, and diagnosis  Central sleep apnea: Treatment  Clinical presentation and diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea in adults  Evaluation of suspected obstructive sleep apnea in children  Titration of positive airway pressure therapy for adults with obstructive sleep apnea  Obstructive sleep apnea: Overview of management in adults  Management of obstructive sleep apnea in children 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 9 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-th…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Pathophysiology of upper airway obstruction in obstructive sleep apnea in adults  Mechanisms and predisposing factors for sleep-related breathing disorders in children  Oral appliances in the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea in adults  Evaluation and management of residual excessive sleepiness in adults with obstructive  sleep apnea  Overview of polysomnography in adults  Home sleep apnea testing for obstructive sleep apnea in adults  Polysomnography in the evaluation of sleep-disordered breathing in adults  Upper airway imaging in obstructive sleep apnea in adults  The following organizations also provide reliable health information.  (   www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/healthtopics.html )  (   www.nhlbi.nih.gov )  (   www.aasmnet.org )  (   www.sleepfoundation.org )  (   www.sleepapnea.org )  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  The editorial staff at UpToDate would like to acknowledge Wolfgang Schmidt-Nowara, MD,  who contributed to an earlier version of this topic review.  Use of UpToDate is subject to the   Terms of Use .  National Library of Medicine ●  National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute ●  American Academy of Sleep Medicine ●  National Sleep Foundation ●  American Sleep Apnea Association ● 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 10 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-t…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  This generalized information is a limited summary of diagnosis, treatment, and/or  medication information. It is not meant to be comprehensive and should be used as a  tool to help the user understand and/or assess potential diagnostic and treatment  options. It does NOT include all information about conditions, treatments, medications,  side effects, or risks that may apply to a specific patient. It is not intended to be medical  advice or a substitute for the medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment of a health care  provider based on the health care provider's examination and assessment of a patient's  specific and unique circumstances. Patients must speak with a health care provider for  complete information about their health, medical questions, and treatment options,  including any risks or benefits regarding use of medications. This information does not  endorse any treatments or medications as safe, effective, or approved for treating a  specific patient. UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates disclaim any warranty or liability relating  to this information or the use thereof. The use of this information is governed by the  Terms of Use, available at   https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en/know/clinical-  effectiveness-terms   ©2023 UpToDate, Inc. and its affiliates and/or licensors. All rights  reserved.  Topic 7719 Version 33.0 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 11 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-t…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  GRAPHICS  Normal airway during sleep  This figure shows how the tongue, uvula, and soft palate (which make up the  upper airway) should normally look in a person who is sleeping.  Graphic 51217 Version 5.0 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 12 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-t…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Airway in a person with sleep apnea  Normally, when a person sleeps, the airway remains open, and air  can pass from the nose and mouth to the lungs. In a person with  sleep apnea, parts of the throat and mouth drop into the airway and  block off the flow of air. This can cause loud snoring and interrupt  breathing for short periods.  Graphic 75747 Version 6.0 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 13 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-t…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link  Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for sleep apnea  The CPAP mask gently blows air into your nose while you sleep. It puts just enough  pressure on your airway to keep it from closing. The mask in this picture fits over  just the nose. Other CPAP devices have masks that fit over the nose and mouth.  Graphic 65324 Version 5.0 04.07.2023 09.25 Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics) - UpToDate  Side 14 af 14 https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sleep-apnea-in-adults-beyond-t…cation:%20Atrial%20fibrillation%20&topicRef=3431&source=see _ link   